(Music) Dannielle Hadley: Life in Pennsylvania means just that: life without the possibility of parole.
For us lifers, as we call ourselves, our only chance for release is through commutation, which has only been granted to two women since 1989, close to 30 years ago.
Our song, "This Is Not Our Home," it tells of our experiences while doing life without the possibility of parole.
(Music) Brenda Watkins: I'm a woman.
I'm a grandmother.
I'm a daughter.
I have a son.
I'm not an angel.
I'm not the devil.
I came to jail when I was so young.
I spend my time here inside these prison walls.
Lost friends to death, saw some go home.
Watch years pass, people come and go, while I do life without parole.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here.
This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone? As the years go by, I hold back my tears, because if I cry I'd give in to fear.
I must be strong, have to hold on.
Gotta get through another year.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here. This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone? I'm not saying that I'm not guilty, I'm not saying that I shouldn't pay.
All I'm asking is for forgiveness.
Gotta have hope I'll be free someday.
Is there a place for me in the world out there? Will they ever know or care that I'm chained? Is there redemption for the sin of my younger days? Because I've changed.
Lord knows I've changed.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here. This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone? Will I see my family or die alone? I'm known to you as Inmate 008106.
Incarcerated 29 years.
My name is Brenda Watkins.
I was born and raised in Hoffman, North Carolina.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Thelma Nichols: Inmate number 0B2472.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Thelma Nichols.
I was born and raised in Philadelphia, P.A.
This is not my home.
(Applause) DH: 008494.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Dannielle Hadley.
I was born and raised in Philadelphia, P.A, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Theresa Battles: Inmate 008309.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Theresa Battles.
I'm from Norton, New Jersey, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Debra Brown: I am known as Inmate 007080.
I've been incarcerated for 30 years.
My name is Debra Brown.
I'm from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Joann Butler: 005961.
I've been incarcerated for 37 years.
My name is Joann Butler, and I was born and raised in Philadelphia.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Diane Hamill Metzger: Number 005634.
I've been incarcerated for 39 and one half years.
My name is Diane Hamill Metzger.
I'm from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Lena Brown: I am 004867.
Incarcerated 40 years.
My name is Lena Brown, and I was born and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Trina Garnett: My number is 005545.
My name is Trina Garnett, I've been incarcerated for 37 years, since I was 14 years old.
Born and raised in Chester, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Will I see my family or die alone? Or die alone? (Applause) When I was nine years old, my mom asked me what I would want my house to look like, and I drew this fairy mushroom.
And then she actually built it.
(Laughter) I don't think I realized this was so unusual at the time, and maybe I still haven't, because I'm still designing houses.
This is a six-story bespoke home on the island of Bali.
It's built almost entirely from bamboo.
The living room overlooks the valley from the fourth floor.
You enter the house by a bridge.
It can get hot in the tropics, so we make big curving roofs to catch the breezes.
But some rooms have tall windows to keep the air conditioning in and the bugs out.
This room we left open.
We made an air-conditioned, tented bed.
And one client wanted a TV room in the corner of her living room.
Boxing off an area with tall walls just didn't feel right, so instead, we made this giant woven pod.
Now, we do have all the necessary luxuries, like bathrooms.
This one is a basket in the corner of the living room, and I've got tell you, some people actually hesitate to use it.
We have not quite figured out our acoustic insulation.
(Laughter) So there are lots of things that we're still working on, but one thing I have learned is that bamboo will treat you well if you use it right.
It's actually a wild grass.
It grows on otherwise unproductive land -- deep ravines, mountainsides.
It lives off of rainwater, spring water, sunlight, and of the 1,450 species of bamboo that grow across the world, we use just seven of them.
That's my dad.
He's the one who got me building with bamboo, and he is standing in a clump of Dendrocalamus asper niger that he planted just seven years ago.
Each year, it sends up a new generation of shoots.
That shoot, we watched it grow a meter in three days just last week, so we're talking about sustainable timber in three years.
Now, we harvest from hundreds of family-owned clumps.
Betung, as we call it, it's really long, up to 18 meters of usable length.
Try getting that truck down the mountain.
And it's strong: it has the tensile strength of steel, the compressive strength of concrete.
Slam four tons straight down on a pole, and it can take it.
Because it's hollow, it's lightweight, light enough to be lifted by just a few men, or, apparently, one woman.
(Laughter) (Applause) And when my father built Green School in Bali, he chose bamboo for all of the buildings on campus, because he saw it as a promise.
It's a promise to the kids.
It's one sustainable material that they will not run out of.
And when I first saw these structures under construction about six years ago, I just thought, this makes perfect sense.
It is growing all around us.
It's strong. It's elegant.
It's earthquake-resistant.
Why hasn't this happened sooner, and what can we do with it next? So along with some of the original builders of Green School, I founded Ibuku.
Ibu means "mother," and ku means "mine," so it represents my Mother Earth, and at Ibuku, we are a team of artisans, architects and designers, and what we're doing together is creating a new way of building.
Over the past five years together, we have built over 50 unique structures, most of them in Bali.
Nine of them are at Green Village -- you've just seen inside some of these homes -- and we fill them with bespoke furniture, we surround them with veggie gardens, we would love to invite you all to come visit someday.
And while you're there, you can also see Green School -- we keep building classrooms there each year -- as well as an updated fairy mushroom house.
We're also working on a little house for export.
This is a traditional Sumbanese home that we replicated, right down to the details and textiles.
A restaurant with an open-air kitchen.
It looks a lot like a kitchen, right? And a bridge that spans 22 meters across a river.
Now, what we're doing, it's not entirely new.
From little huts to elaborate bridges like this one in Java, bamboo has been in use across the tropical regions of the world for literally tens of thousands of years.
There are islands and even continents that were first reached by bamboo rafts.
But until recently, it was almost impossible to reliably protect bamboo from insects, and so, just about everything that was ever built out of bamboo is gone.
Unprotected bamboo weathers.
Untreated bamboo gets eaten to dust.
And so that's why most people, especially in Asia, think that you couldn't be poor enough or rural enough to actually want to live in a bamboo house.
And so we thought, what will it take to change their minds, to convince people that bamboo is worth building with, much less worth aspiring to? First, we needed safe treatment solutions.
Borax is a natural salt.
It turns bamboo into a viable building material.
Treat it properly, design it carefully, and a bamboo structure can last a lifetime.
Second, build something extraordinary out of it.
Inspire people.
Fortunately, Balinese culture fosters craftsmanship.
It values the artisan.
So combine those with the adventurous outliers from new generations of locally trained architects and designers and engineers, and always remember that you are designing for curving, tapering, hollow poles.
No two poles alike, no straight lines, no two-by-fours here.
The tried-and-true, well-crafted formulas and vocabulary of architecture do not apply here.
We have had to invent our own rules.
We ask the bamboo what it's good at, what it wants to become, and what it says is: respect it, design for its strengths, protect it from water, and to make the most of its curves.
So we design in real 3D, making scale structural models out of the same material that we'll later use to build the house.
And bamboo model-making, it's an art, as well as some hardcore engineering.
So that's the blueprint of the house.
(Laughter) And we bring it to site, and with tiny rulers, we measure each pole, and consider each curve, and we choose a piece of bamboo from the pile to replicate that house on site.
When it comes down to the details, we consider everything.
Why are doors so often rectangular? Why not round? How could you make a door better? Well, its hinges battle with gravity, and gravity will always win in the end, so why not have it pivot on the center where it can stay balanced? And while you're at it, why not doors shaped like teardrops? To reap the selective benefits and work within the constraints of this material, we have really had to push ourselves, and within that constraint, we have found space for something new.
It's a challenge: how do you make a ceiling if you don't have any flat boards to work with? Let me tell you, sometimes I dream of sheet rock and plywood.
(Laughter) But if what you've got is skilled craftsmen and itsy bitsy little splits, weave that ceiling together, stretch a canvas over it, lacquer it.
How do you design durable kitchen countertops that do justice to this curving structure you've just built? Slice up a boulder like a loaf of bread, hand-carve each to fit the other, leave the crusts on, and what we're doing, it is almost entirely handmade.
The structural connections of our buildings are reinforced by steel joints, but we use a lot of hand-whittled bamboo pins.
There are thousands of pins in each floor.
This floor is made of glossy and durable bamboo skin.
You can feel the texture under bare feet.
And the floor that you walk on, can it affect the way that you walk? Can it change the footprint that you'll ultimately leave on the world? I remember being nine years old and feeling wonder, and possibility, and a little bit of idealism.
And we've got a really long way to go, there's a lot left to learn, but one thing I know is that with creativity and commitment, you can create beauty and comfort and safety and even luxury out of a material that will grow back.
Thank you.
(Applause) In June of 1998, That's her boat, the American Pearl.
It's 23 feet long and just six feet across at its widest point.
The deck was the size of a cargo bed of a Ford F-150 pickup truck.
Tori and her friends built it by hand, and it weighed about 1,800 pounds.
Her plan was to row it alone across the Atlantic Ocean -- no motor, no sail -- something no woman and no American had ever done before.
This would be her route: over 3,600 miles across the open North Atlantic Ocean.
Professionally, Tori worked as a project administrator for the city of Louisville, Kentucky, her hometown, but her real passion was exploring.
This was not her first big expedition.
Several years earlier, she'd become the first woman to ski to the South Pole.
She was an accomplished rower in college, even competed for a spot on the 1992 U.S. Olympic team, but this, this was different.
(Video) (Music) Tori Murden McClure: Hi. It's Sunday, July 5.
Sector time 9 a.m.
So that's Kentucky time now.
Dawn Landes: Tori made these videos as she rowed.
This is her 21st day at sea.
At this point, she'd covered over 1,000 miles, had had no radio contact in more than two weeks following a storm that disabled all her long-range communications systems just five days in.
Most days looked like this.
At this point, she'd rowed over 200,000 strokes, fighting the current and the wind.
Some days, she traveled as little as 15 feet.
Yeah.
And as frustrating as those days were, other days were like this.
(Video) TMM: And I want to show you my little friends.
whales, sharks, and even some sea turtles.
After two weeks with no human contact, Tori was able to contact a local cargo ship via VHF radio.
(Video) TMM: Do you guys have a weather report, over? Man: Heading up to a low ahead of you but it's heading, and you're obviously going northeast and there's a high behind us.
That'd be coming east-northeast also.
TMM: Good.
DL: She's pretty happy to talk to another human at this point.
(Video) TMM: So weather report says nothing dramatic is going to happen soon.
DL: What the weather report didn't tell her was that she was rowing right into the path of Hurricane Danielle in the worst hurricane season on record in the North Atlantic.
(Video) TMM: Just sprained my ankle.
There's a very strong wind from the east now.
It's blowing about.
It's blowing! After 12 days of storm I get to row for four hours without a flagging wind.
I'm not very happy right now.
As happy as I was this morning, I am unhappy now, so ...
DL: After nearly three months at sea, she'd covered over 3,000 miles.
She was two thirds of the way there, but in the storm, the waves were the size of a seven-story building.
Her boat kept capsizing.
Some of them were pitchpole capsizes, flipping her end over end, and rowing became impossible.
(Video) TMM: It's 6:30 a.m.
I'm in something big, bad and ugly.
Two capsizes.
Last capsize, I took the rib off the top of my ceiling with my back.
I've had about six capsizes now.
The last one was a pitchpole.
I have the Argus beacon with me.
I would set off the distress signal, but quite frankly, I don't think they'd ever be able to find this little boat.
It's so far underwater right now, the only part that's showing pretty much is the cabin.
I've lost track of the number of capsizes.
I seem to capsize about every 15 minutes.
I think I may have broken my left arm.
are tearing the boat to shreds.
where the older boy ran after the other boy.
I'm not sure I'm going to make it through this.
DL: Tori set off her distress beacon and was rescued by a passing container ship.
They found her abandoned boat two months later adrift near France.
I read about it in the newspaper.
In 1998, I was a high school student living in Louisville, Kentucky.
Now, I live in New York City. I'm a songwriter.
And her bravery stuck with me, and I'm adapting her story into a musical called "Row." When Tori returned home, she was feeling disheartened, she was broke.
She was having a hard time making the transition back into civilization.
In this scene, she sits at home.
The phone is ringing, her friends are calling, but she doesn't know how to talk to them.
She sings this song. It's called "Dear Heart." (Guitar) When I was dreaming, I took my body to beautiful places I'd never been.
I saw Gibraltar, and stars of Kentucky burned in the moonlight, making me smile.
And when I awoke here, the sky was so cloudy.
I walked to a party where people I know try hard to know me and ask where I've been, but I can't explain what I've seen to them.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
Just pay attention, go right from the start.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
You can fall off the map, but don't fall apart.
When I was out there, the ocean would hold me, rock me and throw me, light as a child.
But now I'm so heavy, nothing consoles me.
My mind floats like driftwood, wayward and wild.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
Just pay attention, go right from the start.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
You can fall off the map, but don't fall apart.
Eventually, Tori starts to get her feet under her.
She starts hanging out with her friends again.
She meets a guy and falls in love for the first time.
She gets a new job working for another Louisville native, Muhammad Ali.
One day, at lunch with her new boss, Tori shares the news that two other women are setting out to row across the mid-Atlantic, His response was classic Ali: "You don't want to go through life as the woman who almost rowed across the ocean." He was right.
Tori rebuilt the American Pearl, and in December of 1999, she did it.
(Applause) (Guitar) Thank you.
(Applause) Isadora Duncan -- (Music) -- crazy, long-legged woman from San Francisco, got tired of this country, and she wanted to get out.
Isadora was famous somewhere around 1908 for putting up a blue curtain, and she would stand with her hands over her solar plexus and she would wait, and she would wait, and then, she would move.
(Music) Josh and I and Somi call this piece "The Red Circle and the Blue Curtain." Red circle.
Blue curtain.
But, this is not the beginning of the 20th century.
This is a morning in Vancouver in 2015.
(Music) (Singing) Come on, Josh! (Music) (Singing) Go! Are we there yet? I don't think so.
Hey, yeah! (Music) What time is it? (Music) Where are we? Josh.
Somi.
Bill T.
Josh.
Somi.
Bill T.
(Applause) Yeah, yeah! On the path that American children travel to adulthood, two institutions oversee the journey.
The first is the one we hear a lot about: college.
Some of you may remember the excitement that you felt when you first set off for college.
Some of you may be in college right now and you're feeling this excitement at this very moment.
College has some shortcomings.
It's expensive; it leaves young people in debt.
But all in all, it's a pretty good path.
Young people emerge from college with pride and with great friends and with a lot of knowledge about the world.
And perhaps most importantly, a better chance in the labor market than they had before they got there.
Today I want to talk about the second institution overseeing the journey from childhood to adulthood in the United States.
And that institution is prison.
Young people on this journey are meeting with probation officers instead of with teachers.
So why are we having so many problems Their junior year abroad is instead a trip to a state correctional facility.
And they're emerging from their 20s not with degrees in business and English, but with criminal records.
This institution is also costing us a lot, about 40,000 dollars a year to send a young person to prison in New Jersey.
But here, taxpayers are footing the bill and what kids are getting is a cold prison cell and a permanent mark against them when they come home and apply for work.
There are more and more kids on this journey to adulthood than ever before in the United States and that's because in the past 40 years, our incarceration rate has grown by 700 percent.
I have one slide for this talk.
Here it is.
Here's our incarceration rate, about 716 people per 100,000 in the population.
Here's the OECD countries.
What's more, it's poor kids that we're sending to prison, too many drawn from African-American and Latino communities so that prison now stands firmly between the young people trying to make it and the fulfillment of the American Dream.
The problem's actually a bit worse than this 'cause we're not just sending poor kids to prison, we're saddling poor kids with court fees, with probation and parole restrictions, with low-level warrants, we're asking them to live in halfway houses and on house arrest, and we're asking them to negotiate a police force that is entering poor communities of color, not for the purposes of promoting public safety, but to make arrest counts, to line city coffers.
This is the hidden underside to our historic experiment in punishment: young people worried that at any moment, they will be stopped, searched and seized.
Not just in the streets, but in their homes, at school and at work.
I got interested in this other path to adulthood when I was myself a college student attending the University of Pennsylvania in the early 2000s.
Penn sits within a historic African-American neighborhood.
So you've got these two parallel journeys going on simultaneously: the kids attending this elite, private university, and the kids from the adjacent neighborhood, some of whom are making it to college, and many of whom are being shipped to prison.
In my sophomore year, I started tutoring a young woman who was in high school who lived about 10 minutes away from the university.
Soon, her cousin came home from a juvenile detention center.
He was 15, a freshman in high school.
I began to get to know him and his friends and family, and I asked him what he thought about me writing about his life for my senior thesis in college.
This senior thesis became a dissertation at Princeton and now a book.
By the end of my sophomore year, I moved into the neighborhood and I spent the next six years trying to understand what young people were facing as they came of age.
The first week I spent in this neighborhood, I saw two boys, five and seven years old, play this game of chase, where the older boy ran after the other boy.
He played the cop.
When the cop caught up to the younger boy, he pushed him down, handcuffed him with imaginary handcuffs, took a quarter out of the other child's pocket, saying, "I'm seizing that." He asked the child if he was carrying any drugs or if he had a warrant.
Many times, I saw this game repeated, sometimes children would simply give up running, and stick their bodies flat against the ground with their hands above their heads, or flat up against a wall.
Children would yell at each other, "I'm going to lock you up, I'm going to lock you up and you're never coming home!" Once I saw a six-year-old child pull another child's pants down and try to do a cavity search.
In the first 18 months that I lived in this neighborhood, I wrote down every time I saw any contact between police and people that were my neighbors.
So in the first 18 months, I watched the police stop pedestrians or people in cars, search people, run people's names, chase people through the streets, pull people in for questioning, or make an arrest every single day, with five exceptions.
Fifty-two times, I watched the police break down doors, chase people through houses or make an arrest of someone in their home.
Fourteen times in this first year and a half, I watched the police punch, choke, kick, stomp on or beat young men after they had caught them.
Bit by bit, I got to know two brothers, Chuck and Tim.
Chuck was 18 when we met, a senior in high school.
He was playing on the basketball team and making C's and B's.
His younger brother, Tim, was 10.
And Tim loved Chuck; he followed him around a lot, looked to Chuck to be a mentor.
They lived with their mom and grandfather in a two-story row home with a front lawn and a back porch.
Their mom was struggling with addiction all while the boys were growing up.
She never really was able to hold down a job for very long.
It was their grandfather's pension that supported the family, not really enough to pay for food and clothes and school supplies for growing boys.
The family was really struggling.
So when we met, Chuck was a senior in high school.
He had just turned 18.
That winter, a kid in the schoolyard called Chuck's mom a crack whore.
Chuck pushed the kid's face into the snow and the school cops charged him with aggravated assault.
The other kid was fine the next day, I think it was his pride that was injured more than anything.
But anyway, since Chuck was 18, this agg. assault case sent him to adult county jail on State Road in northeast Philadelphia, where he sat, unable to pay the bail -- he couldn't afford it -- while the trial dates dragged on and on and on through almost his entire senior year.
Finally, near the end of this season, the judge on this assault case threw out most of the charges and Chuck came home with only a few hundred dollars' worth of court fees hanging over his head.
Tim was pretty happy that day.
The next fall, Chuck tried to re-enroll as a senior, but the school secretary told him that he was then 19 and too old to be readmitted.
Then the judge on his assault case issued him a warrant for his arrest because he couldn't pay the 225 dollars in court fees that came due a few weeks after the case ended.
Then he was a high school dropout living on the run.
Tim's first arrest came later that year after he turned 11.
Chuck had managed to get his warrant lifted and he was on a payment plan for the court fees and he was driving Tim to school in his girlfriend's car.
So a cop pulls them over, runs the car, and the car comes up as stolen in California.
Chuck had no idea where in the history of this car it had been stolen.
His girlfriend's uncle bought it from a used car auction in northeast Philly.
Chuck and Tim had never been outside of the tri-state, let alone to California.
But anyway, the cops down at the precinct charged Chuck with receiving stolen property.
And then a juvenile judge, a few days later, charged Tim, age 11, with accessory to receiving a stolen property and then he was placed on three years of probation.
With this probation sentence hanging over his head, Chuck sat his little brother down and began teaching him how to run from the police.
They would sit side by side on their back porch looking out into the shared alleyway and Chuck would coach Tim how to spot undercover cars, how to negotiate a late-night police raid, how and where to hide.
I want you to imagine for a second what Chuck and Tim's lives would be like if they were living in a neighborhood where kids were going to college, not prison.
A neighborhood like the one I got to grow up in.
Okay, you might say.
But Chuck and Tim, kids like them, they're committing crimes! Don't they deserve to be in prison? Don't they deserve to be living in fear of arrest? Well, my answer would be no.
They don't.
And certainly not for the same things that other young people with more privilege are doing with impunity.
If Chuck had gone to my high school, that schoolyard fight would have ended there, as a schoolyard fight.
It never would have become an aggravated assault case.
Not a single kid that I went to college with has a criminal record right now.
Not a single one.
But can you imagine how many might have if the police had stopped those kids and searched their pockets for drugs as they walked to class? Or had raided their frat parties in the middle of the night? Okay, you might say.
But doesn't this high incarceration rate partly account for our really low crime rate? Crime is down. That's a good thing.
Totally, that is a good thing. Crime is down.
It dropped precipitously in the '90s and through the 2000s.
But according to a committee of academics convened by the National Academy of Sciences last year, the relationship between our historically high incarceration rates and our low crime rate is pretty shaky.
It turns out that the crime rate goes up and down irrespective of how many young people we send to prison.
We tend to think about justice in a pretty narrow way: good and bad, innocent and guilty.
Injustice is about being wrongfully convicted.
So if you're convicted of something you did do, you should be punished for it.
There are innocent and guilty people, there are victims and there are perpetrators.
Maybe we could think a little bit more broadly than that.
Right now, we're asking kids who live in the most disadvantaged neighborhoods, who have the least amount of family resources, who are attending the country's worst schools, who are facing the toughest time in the labor market, who are living in neighborhoods where violence is an everyday problem, we're asking these kids to walk the thinnest possible line -- to basically never do anything wrong.
Why are we not providing support to young kids facing these challenges? Why are we offering only handcuffs, jail time and this fugitive existence? Can we imagine something better? Can we imagine a criminal justice system that prioritizes recovery, prevention, civic inclusion, rather than punishment? (Applause) A criminal justice system that acknowledges the legacy of exclusion that poor people of color in the U.S. have faced and that does not promote and perpetuate those exclusions.
(Applause) And finally, a criminal justice system that believes in black young people, rather than treating black young people as the enemy to be rounded up.
(Applause) The good news is that we already are.
A few years ago, Michelle Alexander wrote "The New Jim Crow," which got Americans to see incarceration as a civil rights issue of historic proportions in a way they had not seen it before.
President Obama and Attorney General Eric Holder have come out very strongly on sentencing reform, on the need to address racial disparity in incarceration.
We're seeing states throw out Stop and Frisk as the civil rights violation that it is.
We're seeing cities and states decriminalize possession of marijuana.
New York, New Jersey and California have been dropping their prison populations, closing prisons, while also seeing a big drop in crime.
Texas has gotten into the game now, also closing prisons, investing in education.
This curious coalition is building from the right and the left, made up of former prisoners and fiscal conservatives, of civil rights activists and libertarians, of young people taking to the streets to protest police violence against unarmed black teenagers, and older, wealthier people -- some of you are here in the audience -- pumping big money into decarceration initiatives In a deeply divided Congress, the work of reforming our criminal justice system is just about the only thing that the right and the left are coming together on.
I did not think I would see this political moment in my lifetime.
I think many of the people who have been working tirelessly to write about the causes and consequences of our historically high incarceration rates did not think we would see this moment in our lifetime.
The question for us now is, how much can we make of it? How much can we change? I want to end with a call to young people, the young people attending college and the young people struggling to stay out of prison or to make it through prison and return home.
It may seem like these paths to adulthood are worlds apart, but the young people participating in these two institutions conveying us to adulthood, they have one thing in common: Both can be leaders in the work of reforming our criminal justice system.
Young people have always been leaders in the fight for equal rights, the fight for more people to be granted dignity and a fighting chance at freedom.
The mission for the generation of young people coming of age in this, a sea-change moment, potentially, is to end mass incarceration and build a new criminal justice system, emphasis on the word justice.
Thanks.
(Applause) The brain is an amazing and complex organ.
And while many people are fascinated by the brain, they can't really tell you that much about the properties about how the brain works I tell radio stories about design, And one of the reasons why is that the equipment is so complex and so expensive that it's really only done at major universities and large institutions.
And so in order to be able to access the brain, you really need to dedicate your life and spend six and a half years as a graduate student just to become a neuroscientist to get access to these tools.
And that's a shame because one out of five of us, that's 20 percent of the entire world, will have a neurological disorder.
And there are zero cures for these diseases.
And so it seems that what we should be doing is reaching back earlier in the eduction process and teaching students about neuroscience so that in the future, they may be thinking about possibly becoming a brain scientist.
When I was a graduate student, my lab mate Tim Marzullo and myself, decided that what if we took this complex equipment that we have for studying the brain and made it simple enough and affordable enough that anyone that you know, an amateur or a high school student, could learn and actually participate in the discovery of neuroscience.
And so we did just that.
A few years ago, we started a company called Backyard Brains and we make DIY neuroscience equipment and I brought some here tonight, and I want to do some demonstrations.
You guys want to see some? So I need a volunteer.
So right before -- what is your name? (Applause) Sam Kelly: Sam.
Greg Gage: All right, Sam, I'm going to record from your brain.
Have you had this before? SK: No.
GG: I need you to stick out your arm for science, roll up your sleeve a bit, So what I'm going to do, I'm putting electrodes on your arm, and you're probably wondering, I just said I'm going to record from your brain, what am I doing with your arm? Well, you have about 80 billion neurons inside your brain right now.
They're sending electrical messages back and forth, and chemical messages.
But some of your neurons right here in your motor cortex are going to send messages down when you move your arm like this.
They're going to go down across your corpus callosum, down onto your spinal cord to your lower motor neuron out to your muscles here, and that electrical discharge is going to be picked up by these electrodes right here and we're going to be able to listen to exactly what your brain is going to be doing.
So I'm going to turn this on for a second.
Have you ever heard what your brain sounds like? SK: No.
GG: Let's try it out. So go ahead and squeeze your hand.
(Rumbling) So what you're listening to, so this is your motor units happening right here.
Let's take a look at it as well.
So I'm going to stand over here, and I'm going to open up our app here.
So now I want you to squeeze.
(Rumbling) So right here, these are the motor units that are happening from her spinal cord out to her muscle right here, and as she's doing it, you're seeing the electrical activity that's happening here.
You can even click here and try to see one of them.
So keep doing it really hard.
So now we've paused on one motor action potential that's happening right now inside of your brain.
Do you guys want to see some more? (Applause) That's interesting, but let's get it better.
I need one more volunteer.
What is your name, sir? Miguel Goncalves: Miguel.
GG: Miguel, all right.
You're going to stand right here.
So when you're moving your arm like this, your brain is sending a signal down to your muscles right here.
I want you to move your arm as well.
So your brain is going to send a signal down to your muscles.
And so it turns out that there is a nerve that's right here that runs up here that innervates these three fingers, and it's close enough to the skin that we might be able to stimulate that so that what we can do is copy your brain signals going out to your hand and inject it into your hand, so that your hand will move when your brain tells your hand to move.
So in a sense, she will take away your free will and you will no longer have any control over this hand.
You with me? So I just need to hook you up.
(Laughter) So I'm going to find your ulnar nerve, which is probably right around here.
You don't know what you're signing up for when you come up.
So now I'm going to move away and we're going to plug it in to our human-to-human interface over here.
Okay, so Sam, I want you to squeeze your hand again.
Do it again. Perfect.
So now I'm going to hook you up over here so that you get the -- It's going to feel a little bit weird at first, this is going to feel like a -- (Laughter) You know, when you lose your free will, and someone else becomes your agent, it does feel a bit strange.
Now I want you to relax your hand.
Sam, you're with me? So you're going to squeeze.
I'm not going to turn it on yet, so go ahead and give it a squeeze.
So now, are you ready, Miguel? MG: Ready as I'll ever be.
GG: I've turned it on, so go ahead and turn your hand.
Do you feel that a little bit? MG: Nope.
GG: Okay, do it again? MG: A little bit.
GG: A little bit? (Laughter) So relax.
So hit it again.
(Laughter) Oh, perfect, perfect.
So relax, do it again.
All right, so right now, your brain is controlling your arm and it's also controlling his arm, so go ahead and just do it one more time.
All right, so it's perfect. (Laughter) So now, what would happen if I took over my control of your hand? And so, just relax your hand.
What happens? Ah, nothing.
Why not? Because the brain has to do it.
So you do it again.
All right, that's perfect.
Thank you guys for being such a good sport.
This is what's happening all across the world -- electrophysiology! We're going to bring on the neuro-revolution.
Thank you.
(Applause) These dragons from deep time are incredible creatures.
They're bizzarre, they're beautiful, and there's very little we know about them.
These thoughts were going through my head when I looked at the pages of my first dinosaur book.
I was about five years old at the time, and I decided there and then that I would become a paleontologist.
Paleontology allowed me to combine my love for animals with my desire to travel to far-flung corners of the world.
And now, a few years later, I've led several expeditions to the ultimate far-flung corner on this planet, the Sahara.
I've worked in the Sahara because I've been on a quest to uncover new remains of a bizarre, giant predatory dinosaur called Spinosaurus.
A few bones of this animal have been found in the deserts of Egypt and were described about 100 years ago by a German paleontologist.
Unfortunately, all his Spinosaurus bones were destroyed in World War II.
So all we're left with are just a few drawings and notes.
From these drawings, we know that this creature, which lived about 100 million years ago, was very big, it had tall spines on its back, forming a magnificent sail, and it had long, slender jaws, a bit like a crocodile, with conical teeth, that may have been used to catch slippery prey, like fish.
But that was pretty much all we knew about this animal for the next 100 years.
My fieldwork took me to the border region between Morocco and Algeria, a place called the Kem Kem.
It's a difficult place to work in.
You have to deal with sandstorms and snakes and scorpions, and it's very difficult to find good fossils there.
But our hard work paid off.
We discovered many incredible specimens.
There's the largest dinosaur bone their negative evaluation of politics, We found remains of giant predatory dinosaurs, medium-sized predatory dinosaurs, and seven or eight different kinds of crocodile-like hunters.
These fossils were deposited in a river system.
The river system was also home to a giant, car-sized coelacanth, a monster sawfish, and the skies over the river system were filled with pterosaurs, flying reptiles.
It was a pretty dangerous place, not the kind of place where you'd want to travel to if you had a time machine.
So we're finding all these incredible fossils of animals that lived alongside Spinosaurus, but Spinosaurus itself proved to be very elusive.
We were just finding bits and pieces and I was hoping that we'd find a partial skeleton at some point.
Finally, very recently, we were able to track down a dig site where a local fossil hunter found several bones of Spinosaurus.
We returned to the site, we collected more bones.
And so after 100 years we finally had another partial skeleton of this bizarre creature.
And we were able to reconstruct it.
We now know that Spinosaurus had a head a little bit like a crocodile, very different from other predatory dinosaurs, very different from the T. rex.
But the really interesting information came from the rest of the skeleton.
We had long spines, the spines forming the big sail.
We had leg bones, we had skull bones, we had paddle-shaped feet, wide feet -- again, very unusual, no other dinosaur has feet like this -- and we think they may have been used to walk on soft sediment, or maybe for paddling in the water.
We also looked at the fine microstructure of the bone, the inside structure of Spinosaurus bones, and it turns out that they're very dense and compact.
Again, this is something we see in animals that spend a lot of time in the water, it's useful for buoyancy control in the water.
We C.T.-scanned all of our bones and built a digital Spinosaurus skeleton.
And when we looked at the digital skeleton, It's bigger than a T. rex, and yes, the head has "fish-eating" written all over it, but really the entire skeleton has "water-loving" written all over it -- dense bone, paddle-like feet, and the hind limbs are reduced in size, and again, this is something we see in animals that spend a substantial amount of time in the water.
So, as we fleshed out our Spinosaurus -- I'm looking at muscle attachments and wrapping our dinosaur in skin -- we realize that we're dealing with a river monster, a predatory dinosaur, bigger than T. rex, the ruler of this ancient river of giants, feeding on the many aquatic animals I showed you earlier on.
So that's really what makes this an incredible discovery.
It's a dinosaur like no other.
And some people told me, "Wow, this is a once-in-a-lifetime discovery.
There are not many things left to discover in the world." Well, I think nothing could be further from the truth.
I think the Sahara's still full of treasures, and when people tell me there are no places left to explore, I like to quote a famous dinosaur hunter, Roy Chapman Andrews, and he said, "Always, there has been an adventure just around the corner -- and the world is still full of corners." That was true many decades ago when Roy Chapman Andrews wrote these lines.
And it is still true today.
Thank you.
(Applause) Virtual reality started for me in sort of an unusual place.
It was the 1970s.
I got into the field very young: I was seven years old.
And the tool that I used to access virtual reality was the Evel Knievel stunt cycle.
This is a commercial for that particular item: (Video) Voice-over: What a jump! Evel's riding the amazing stunt cycle.
I wanted to be part of that, Chris Milk: So this was my joy back then.
I rode this motorcycle everywhere.
And I was there with Evel Knievel; we jumped the Snake River Canyon together.
I wanted the rocket.
I never got the rocket, I only got the motorcycle.
I felt so connected to this world.
I didn't want to be a storyteller when I grew up, I wanted to be stuntman.
I was there. Evel Knievel was my friend.
I had so much empathy for him.
But it didn't work out. (Laughter) I went to art school.
I started making music videos.
And this is one of the early music videos that I made: (Music: "Touch the Sky" by Kanye West) CM: You may notice some slight similarities here.
(Laughter) And I got that rocket.
(Laughter) So, now I'm a filmmaker, or, the beginning of a filmmaker, and I started using the tools that are available to me as a filmmaker to try to tell the most compelling stories that I can to an audience.
And film is this incredible medium that allows us to feel empathy for people that are very different than us and worlds completely foreign from our own.
Unfortunately, Evel Knievel did not feel the same empathy for us that we felt for him, and he sued us for this video -- (Laughter) -- shortly thereafter.
On the upside, the man that I worshipped as a child, the man that I wanted to become as an adult, I was finally able to get his autograph.
(Applause) Let's talk about film now.
Film, it's an incredible medium, but essentially, it's the same now as it was then.
It's a group of rectangles that are played in a sequence.
And we've done incredible things with those rectangles.
But I started thinking about, is there a way that I can use modern and developing technologies to tell stories in different ways and tell different kinds of stories that maybe I couldn't tell using the traditional tools of filmmaking that we've been using for 100 years? So I started experimenting, and what I was trying to do was to build the ultimate empathy machine.
And here's one of the early experiments: (Music) So this is called "The Wilderness Downtown." It was a collaboration with Arcade Fire.
It asked you to put in the address where you grew up at the beginning of it.
It's a website.
And out of it starts growing these little boxes with different browser windows.
And you see this teenager running down a street, and then you see Google Street View and Google Maps imagery and you realize the street he's running down is yours.
And when he stops in front of a house, he stops in front of your house.
And this was great, and I saw people having an even deeper emotional reaction to this than the things that I had made in rectangles.
And I'm essentially taking a piece of your history and putting it inside the framing of the story.
But then I started thinking, okay, well that's a part of you, but how do I put all of you inside of the frame? So to do that, I started making art installations.
And this is one called "The Treachery of Sanctuary." It's a triptych. I'm going to show you the third panel.
(Music) So now I've got you inside of the frame, and I saw people having even more visceral emotional reactions to this work than the previous one.
But then I started thinking about frames, and what do they represent? And a frame is just a window.
I mean, all the media that we watch -- television, cinema -- they're these windows into these other worlds.
And I thought, well, great. I got you in a frame.
But I don't want you in the frame, I don't want you in the window, I want you through the window, I want you on the other side, in the world, inhabiting the world.
So that leads me back to virtual reality.
Let's talk about virtual reality.
Unfortunately, talking about virtual reality is like dancing about architecture.
And this is actually someone dancing about architecture in virtual reality.
(Laughter) So, it's difficult to explain. Why is it difficult to explain? It's difficult because it's a very experiential medium.
You feel your way inside of it.
It's a machine, but inside of it, it feels like real life, it feels like truth.
And you feel present in the world that you're inside and you feel present with the people that you're inside of it with.
So, I'm going to show you a demo of a virtual reality film: a full-screeen version of all the information that we capture when we shoot virtual reality.
So we're shooting in every direction.
This is a camera system that we built that has 3D cameras that look in every direction and binaural microphones that face in every direction.
We take this and we build, basically, a sphere of a world that you inhabit.
So what I'm going to show you is not a view into the world, it's basically the whole world stretched into a rectangle.
So this film is called "Clouds Over Sidra," and it was made in conjunction with our virtual reality company called VRSE and the United Nations, and a co-collaborator named Gabo Arora.
And we went to a Syrian refugee camp in Jordan in December and shot the story of a 12-year-old girl there named Sidra.
And she and her family fled Syria through the desert into Jordan and she's been living in this camp for the last year and a half.
(Video) Sidra: My name is Sidra.
I am 12 years old.
I am in the fifth grade.
I am from Syria, in the Daraa Province, Inkhil City.
I have lived here in the Zaatari camp in Jordan for the last year and a half.
I have a big family: three brothers, one is a baby.
He cries a lot.
I asked my father if I cried when I was a baby and he says I did not.
I think I was a stronger baby than my brother.
CM: So, when you're inside of the headset.
you're not seeing it like this.
You're looking around through this world.
You'll notice you see full 360 degrees, in all directions.
And when you're sitting there in her room, watching her, you're not watching it through a television screen, you're not watching it through a window, you're sitting there with her.
When you look down, you're sitting on the same ground that she's sitting on.
And because of that, you feel her humanity in a deeper way.
You empathize with her in a deeper way.
And I think that we can change minds with this machine.
And we've already started to try to change a few.
So we took this film to the World Economic Forum in Davos in January.
And we showed it to a group of people whose decisions affect the lives of millions of people.
And these are people who might not otherwise be sitting in a tent in a refugee camp in Jordan.
But in January, one afternoon in Switzerland, they suddenly all found themselves there.
And they were affected by it.
So we're going to make more of them.
We're working with the United Nations right now to shoot a whole series of these films.
We just finished shooting a story in Liberia.
And now, we're going to shoot a story in India.
And we're taking these films, and we're showing them at the United Nations to people that work there and people that are visiting there.
And we're showing them to the people that can actually change the lives of the people inside of the films.
And that's where I think we just start to scratch the surface of the true power of virtual reality.
It's not a video game peripheral.
It connects humans to other humans in a profound way that I've never seen before in any other form of media.
And it can change people's perception of each other.
And that's how I think virtual reality has the potential to actually change the world.
So, it's a machine, but through this machine we become more compassionate, we become more empathetic, and we become more connected.
And ultimately, we become more human.
Thank you.
(Applause) Now, I'm an ethnobotanist.
Love is complicated.
You're looking at a fly-through of the Hubble Space Telescope Ultra-Deep Field, one of the most distant images of our universe ever observed.
Everything you see here is a galaxy, comprised of billions of stars each.
And the farthest galaxy is a trillion, trillion kilometers away.
As an astrophysicist, I have the awesome privilege of studying some of the most exotic objects in our universe.
The objects that have captivated me from first crush throughout my career are supermassive, hyperactive black holes.
Weighing one to 10 billion times the mass of our own sun, these galactic black holes are devouring material, at a rate of upwards of 1,000 times more than your "average" supermassive black hole.
(Laughter) These two characteristics, with a few others, make them quasars.
At the same time, the objects I study are producing some of the most powerful particle streams ever observed.
These narrow streams, called jets, are moving at 99.99 percent of the speed of light, and are pointed directly at the Earth.
These jetted, Earth-pointed, hyperactive and supermassive black holes are called blazars, or blazing quasars.
What makes blazars so special is that they're some of the universe's most efficient particle accelerators, transporting incredible amounts of energy throughout a galaxy.
Here, I'm showing an artist's conception of a blazar.
The dinner plate by which material falls onto the black hole is called the accretion disc, shown here in blue.
Some of that material is slingshotted around the black hole and accelerated to insanely high speeds in the jet, shown here in white.
Although the blazar system is rare, the process by which nature pulls in material via a disk, and then flings some of it out via a jet, is more common.
to show its approximate relationship to the larger galactic context.
Beyond the cosmic accounting of what goes in to what goes out, one of the hot topics in blazar astrophysics right now is where the highest-energy jet emission comes from.
In this image, I'm interested in where this white blob forms and if, as a result, there's any relationship between the jet and the accretion disc material.
Clear answers to this question were almost completely inaccessible until 2008, when NASA launched a new telescope that better detects gamma ray light -- that is, light with energies a million times higher than your standard x-ray scan.
I simultaneously compare variations between the gamma ray light data and the visible light data from day to day and year to year, to better localize these gamma ray blobs.
My research shows that in some instances, these blobs form much closer to the black hole than we initially thought.
As we more confidently localize where these gamma ray blobs are forming, we can better understand how jets are being accelerated, and ultimately reveal the dynamic processes by which some of the most fascinating objects in our universe are formed.
This all started as a love story.
And it still is.
This love transformed me from a curious, stargazing young girl to a professional astrophysicist, hot on the heels of celestial discovery.
Who knew that chasing after the universe would ground me so deeply to my mission here on Earth.
Then again, when do we ever know where love's first flutter will truly take us.
Thank you.
(Applause) To be honest, by personality, I'm just not much of a crier.
But I think in my career that's been a good thing.
I'm a civil rights lawyer, and I've seen some horrible things in the world.
I began my career working police abuse cases in the United States.
And then in 1994, I was sent to Rwanda to be the director of the U.N.'s genocide investigation.
It turns out that tears just aren't much help when you're trying to investigate a genocide.
The things I had to see, and feel and touch were pretty unspeakable.
What I can tell you is this: that the Rwandan genocide was one of the world's greatest failures of simple compassion.
That word, compassion, actually comes from two Latin words: cum passio, which simply mean "to suffer with." And the things that I saw and experienced in Rwanda as I got up close to human suffering, it did, in moments, move me to tears.
But I just wish that I, and the rest of the world, had been moved earlier.
And not just to tears, but to actually stop the genocide.
Now by contrast, I've also been involved with one of the world's greatest successes of compassion.
And that's the fight against global poverty.
It's a cause that probably has involved all of us here.
I don't know if your first introduction might have been choruses of "We Are the World," or maybe the picture of a sponsored child on your refrigerator door, or maybe the birthday you donated for fresh water.
I don't really remember what my first introduction to poverty was but I do remember the most jarring.
It was when I met Venus -- she's a mom from Zambia.
She's got three kids and she's a widow.
When I met her, she had walked about 12 miles in the only garments she owned, to come to the capital city and to share her story.
She sat down with me for hours, just ushered me in to the world of poverty.
She described what it was like when the coals on the cooking fire finally just went completely cold.
When that last drop of cooking oil finally ran out.
When the last of the food, despite her best efforts, ran out.
She had to watch her youngest son, Peter, suffer from malnutrition, as his legs just slowly bowed into uselessness.
As his eyes grew cloudy and dim.
And then as Peter finally grew cold.
For over 50 years, stories like this have been moving us to compassion.
We whose kids have plenty to eat.
And we're moved not only to care about global poverty, but to actually try to do our part to stop the suffering.
Now there's plenty of room for critique that we haven't done enough, and what it is that we've done hasn't been effective enough, but the truth is this: The fight against global poverty is probably the broadest, longest running manifestation of the human phenomenon of compassion in the history of our species.
And so I'd like to share a pretty shattering insight that might forever change the way you think about that struggle.
But first, let me begin with what you probably already know.
Thirty-five years ago, when I would have been graduating from high school, they told us that 40,000 kids every day died because of poverty.
That number, today, is now down to 17,000.
Way too many, of course, but it does mean that every year, there's eight million kids who don't have to die from poverty.
Moreover, the number of people in our world that has fallen from 50 percent, to only 15 percent.
This is massive progress, and this exceeds everybody's expectations about what is possible.
And I think you and I, I think, honestly, that we can feel proud and encouraged to see the way that compassion actually has the power to succeed in stopping the suffering of millions.
But here's the part that you might not hear very much about.
If you move that poverty mark just up to two dollars a day, it turns out that virtually the same two billion people who were stuck in that harsh poverty when I was in high school, are still stuck there, 35 years later.
So why, why are so many billions still stuck in such harsh poverty? Well, let's think about Venus for a moment.
Now for decades, my wife and I have been moved by common compassion to sponsor kids, to fund microloans, to support generous levels of foreign aid.
But until I had actually talked to Venus, I would have had no idea that none of those approaches actually addressed why she had to watch her son die.
"We were doing fine," Venus told me, "until Brutus started to cause trouble." Now, Brutus is Venus' neighbor and "cause trouble" is what happened the day after Venus' husband died, when Brutus just came and threw Venus and the kids out of the house, stole all their land, and robbed their market stall.
You see, Venus was thrown into destitution by violence.
And then it occurred to me, of course, that none of my child sponsorships, none of the microloans, none of the traditional anti-poverty programs were going to stop Brutus, because they weren't meant to.
This became even more clear to me when I met Griselda.
She's a marvelous young girl living in a very poor community in Guatemala.
And one of the things we've learned over the years is that perhaps the most powerful thing that Griselda and her family can do to get Griselda and her family out of poverty is to make sure that she goes to school.
The experts call this the Girl Effect.
But when we met Griselda, she wasn't going to school.
In fact, she was rarely ever leaving her home.
Days before we met her, while she was walking home from church with her family, in broad daylight, men from her community just snatched her off the street, and violently raped her.
See, Griselda had every opportunity to go to school, it just wasn't safe for her to get there.
And Griselda's not the only one.
Please don't move your eyes. Keep your eyes fixated they are -- when victims of the everyday violence of domestic abuse and sexual violence -- those two forms of violence account for more death and disability than malaria, than car accidents, than war combined.
The truth is, the poor of our world are trapped in whole systems of violence.
In South Asia, for instance, I could drive past this rice mill and see this man hoisting these 100-pound sacks of rice upon his thin back.
But I would have no idea, until later, that he was actually a slave, held by violence in that rice mill since I was in high school.
Decades of anti-poverty programs right in his community were never able to rescue him or any of the hundred other slaves from the beatings and the rapes and the torture of violence inside the rice mill.
In fact, half a century of anti-poverty programs have left more poor people in slavery than in any other time in human history.
Experts tell us that there's about 35 million people in slavery today.
That's about the population of the entire nation of Canada, where we're sitting today.
This is why, over time, I have come to call this epidemic of violence the Locust Effect.
Because in the lives of the poor, it just descends like a plague and it destroys everything.
In fact, now when you survey very, very poor communities, residents will tell you that their greatest fear is violence.
But notice the violence that they fear is not the violence of genocide or the wars, it's everyday violence.
So for me, as a lawyer, of course, my first reaction was to think, well, of course we've got to change all the laws.
We've got to make all this violence against the poor illegal.
But then I found out, it already is.
The problem is not that the poor don't get laws, it's that they don't get law enforcement.
In the developing world, basic law enforcement systems are so broken that recently the U.N. issued a report that found that "most poor people live outside the protection of the law." Now honestly, you and I have just about no idea of what that would mean because we have no first-hand experience of it.
Functioning law enforcement for us is just a total assumption.
In fact, nothing expresses that assumption more clearly than three simple numbers: which, of course, is the number for the emergency police operator here in Canada and in the United States, where the average response time to a police 911 emergency call But what if there was no law enforcement to protect you? A woman in Oregon recently experienced what this would be like.
She was home alone in her dark house on a Saturday night, when a man started to tear his way into her home.
This was her worst nightmare, because this man had actually put her in the hospital from an assault just two weeks before.
So terrified, she picks up that phone and does what any of us would do: She calls 911 -- but only to learn that because of budget cuts in her county, law enforcement wasn't available on the weekends.
Listen.
Dispatcher: I don't have anybody to send out there.
Woman: OK Dispatcher: Um, obviously if he comes inside the residence and assaults you, can you ask him to go away? Or do you know if he is intoxicated or anything? Woman: I've already asked him. I've already told him I was calling you.
He's broken in before, busted down my door, assaulted me.
Dispatcher: Uh-huh.
Woman: Um, yeah, so ...
Dispatcher: Is there any way you could safely leave the residence? Woman: No, I can't, because he's blocking pretty much my only way out.
Dispatcher: Well, the only thing I can do is give you some advice, and call the sheriff's office tomorrow.
Obviously, if he comes in and unfortunately has a weapon or is trying to cause you physical harm, that's a different story.
You know, the sheriff's office doesn't work up there.
I don't have anybody to send." Gary Haugen: Tragically, the woman inside that house was violently assaulted, choked and raped because this is what it means to live outside the rule of law.
And this is where billions of our poorest live.
What does that look like? In Bolivia, for example, if a man sexually assaults a poor child, statistically, he's at greater risk of slipping in the shower and dying than he is of ever going to jail for that crime.
In South Asia, if you enslave a poor person, you're at greater risk of being struck by lightning than ever being sent to jail for that crime.
And so the epidemic of everyday violence, it just rages on.
And it devastates our efforts to try to help billions of people out of their two-dollar-a-day hell.
Because the data just doesn't lie.
It turns out that you can give all manner of goods and services from taking it all away, you're going to be very disappointed in the long-term impact of your efforts.
So you would think that the disintegration of basic law enforcement in the developing world would be a huge priority for the global fight against poverty.
But it's not.
Auditors of international assistance recently couldn't find even one percent of aid going to protect the poor from the lawless chaos of everyday violence.
And honestly, when we do talk about violence against the poor, sometimes it's in the weirdest of ways.
A fresh water organization tells a heart-wrenching story of girls who are raped on the way to fetching water, and then celebrates the solution of a new well that drastically shortens their walk.
End of story.
But not a word about the rapists who are still right there in the community.
If a young woman on one of our college campuses was raped on her walk to the library, we would never celebrate the solution of moving the library closer to the dorm.
And yet, for some reason, this is okay for poor people.
Now the truth is, the traditional experts in economic development and poverty alleviation, they don't know how to fix this problem.
And so what happens? They don't talk about it.
But the more fundamental reason that law enforcement for the poor in the developing world is so neglected, is because the people inside the developing world, with money, don't need it.
I was at the World Economic Forum not long ago talking to corporate executives who have massive businesses in the developing world and I was just asking them, "How do you guys protect all your people and property from all the violence?" And they looked at each other, and they said, practically in unison, "We buy it." Indeed, private security forces in the developing world are now, four, five and seven times larger than the public police force.
In Africa, the largest employer on the continent now is private security.
But see, the rich can pay for safety and can keep getting richer, but the poor can't pay for it and they're left totally unprotected and they keep getting thrown to the ground.
This is a massive and scandalous outrage.
And it doesn't have to be this way.
Broken law enforcement can be fixed.
Violence can be stopped.
Almost all criminal justice systems, they start out broken and corrupt, but they can be transformed by fierce effort and commitment.
The path forward is really pretty clear.
Number one: We have to start making stopping violence indispensable to the fight against poverty.
In fact, any conversation about global poverty that doesn't include the problem of violence must be deemed not serious.
And secondly, we have to begin to seriously invest resources and share expertise to support the developing world as they fashion new, public systems of justice, not private security, that give everybody a chance to be safe.
These transformations are actually possible and they're happening today.
Recently, the Gates Foundation funded a project in the second largest city of the Philippines, where local advocates and local law enforcement were able to transform corrupt police and broken courts so drastically, that in just four short years, they were able to measurably reduce the commercial sexual violence against poor kids by 79 percent.
You know, from the hindsight of history, what's always most inexplicable and inexcusable are the simple failures of compassion.
Because I think history convenes a tribunal of our grandchildren and they just ask us, "Grandma, Grandpa, where were you? Where were you, Grandpa, when the Jews were fleeing Nazi Germany and were being rejected from our shores? Where were you? And Grandma, where were you when they were marching our Japanese-American neighbors off to internment camps? And Grandpa, where were you when they were beating our African-American neighbors just because they were trying to register to vote?" Likewise, when our grandchildren ask us, "Grandma, Grandpa, where were you when two billion of the world's poorest were drowning in a lawless chaos of everyday violence?" I hope we can say that we had compassion, that we raised our voice, and as a generation, we were moved to make the violence stop.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Really powerfully argued.
Talk to us a bit about some of the things that have actually been happening to, for example, boost police training.
How hard a process is that? GH: Well, one of the glorious things that's starting to happen now is that the collapse of these systems and the consequences are becoming obvious.
There's actually, now, political will to do that.
But it just requires now an investment of resources and transfer of expertise.
There's a political will struggle that's going to take place as well, but those are winnable fights, because we've done some examples around the world at International Justice Mission that are very encouraging.
CA: So just tell us in one country, how much it costs to make a material difference to police, for example -- I know that's only one piece of it.
GH: In Guatemala, for instance, we've started a project there with the local police and court system, prosecutors, to retrain them so that they can actually effectively bring these cases.
And we've seen prosecutions against perpetrators of sexual violence increase by more than 1,000 percent.
This project has been very modestly funded at about a million dollars a year, and the kind of bang you can get for your buck in terms of leveraging a criminal justice system that could function if it were properly trained and motivated and led, and these countries, especially a middle class that is seeing that there's really no future with this total instability and total privatization of security I think there's an opportunity, a window for change.
CA: But to make this happen, you have to look at each part in the chain -- the police, who else? GH: So that's the thing about law enforcement, it starts out with the police, they're the front end of the pipeline of justice, but they hand if off to the prosecutors, and the prosecutors hand it off to the courts, and the survivors of violence have to be supported by social services all the way through that.
So you have to do an approach that pulls that all together.
In the past, there's been a little bit of training of the courts, but they get crappy evidence from the police, or a little police intervention that has to do with narcotics or terrorism but nothing to do with treating the common poor person with excellent law enforcement, so it's about pulling that all together, and you can actually have people in very poor communities experience law enforcement like us, which is imperfect in our own experience, for sure, but boy, is it a great thing to sense that you can call 911 and maybe someone will protect you.
CA: Gary, I think you've done a spectacular job of bringing this to the world's attention in your book and right here today.
Thanks so much.
Gary Haugen.
(Applause) Well, you know, sometimes the most important things come in the smallest packages.
I am going to try to convince you, in the 15 minutes I have, that microbes have a lot to say about questions such as, "Are we alone?" and they can tell us more about not only life in our solar system but also maybe beyond, and this is why I am tracking them down in the most impossible places on Earth, in extreme environments where conditions are really pushing them to the brink of survival.
Actually, sometimes me too, when I'm trying to follow them too close.
But here's the thing: We are the only advanced civilization in the solar system, but that doesn't mean that there is no microbial life nearby.
In fact, the planets and moons you see here could host life -- all of them -- and we know that, and it's a strong possibility.
And if we were going to find life on those moons and planets, then we would answer questions such as, Where are we coming from? Do we have family in the neighborhood? Is there life beyond our solar system? And we can ask all those questions because there has been a revolution in our understanding of what a habitable planet is, and today, a habitable planet is a planet that has a zone where water can stay stable, but to me this is a horizontal definition of habitability, because it involves a distance to a star, but there is another dimension to habitability, and this is a vertical dimension.
Think of it as conditions in the subsurface of a planet where you are very far away from a sun, but you still have water, energy, nutrients, which for some of them means food, and a protection.
I cracked open an episode of my radio show, very far away from any sunlight, deep in the ocean, you have life thriving So when you think of it at that point, all walls collapse.
You have no limitations, basically.
And if you have been looking at the headlines lately, then you will see that we have discovered a subsurface ocean on Europa, on Ganymede, on Enceladus, on Titan, and now we are finding a geyser and hot springs on Enceladus, Our solar system is turning into a giant spa.
For anybody who has gone to a spa knows how much microbes like that, right? (Laughter) So at that point, think also about Mars.
There is no life possible at the surface of Mars today, but it might still be hiding underground.
So, we have been making progress in our understanding of habitability, but we also have been making progress in our understanding of what the signatures of life are on Earth.
And you can have what we call organic molecules, and these are the bricks of life, and you can have fossils, and you can minerals, biominerals, which is due to the reaction between bacteria and rocks, and of course you can have gases in the atmosphere.
And when you look at those tiny green algae on the right of the slide here, they are the direct descendants of those who have been pumping oxygen a billion years ago in the atmosphere of the Earth.
When they did that, they poisoned 90 percent of the life at the surface of the Earth, but they are the reason why you are breathing this air today.
But as much as our understanding grows of all of these things, there is one question we still cannot answer, and this is, where are we coming from? And you know, it's getting worse, because we won't be able to find the physical evidence of where we are coming from on this planet, and the reason being is that anything that is older than four billion years is gone.
All record is gone, erased by plate tectonics and erosion.
This is what I call the Earth's biological horizon.
Beyond this horizon we don't know where we are coming from.
And we might be able to find evidence of our own origin in the most unlikely place, and this place in Mars.
How is this possible? Well clearly at the beginning of the solar system, Mars and the Earth were bombarded by giant asteroids and comets, and there were ejecta from these impacts all over the place.
Earth and Mars kept throwing rocks at each other for a very long time.
Pieces of rocks landed on the Earth.
And a frame is just a window.
So clearly, those two planets may have been seeded by the same material.
So yeah, maybe Granddady is sitting there on the surface and waiting for us.
But that also means that we can go to Mars and try to find traces of our own origin.
Mars may hold that secret for us.
This is why Mars is so special to us.
But for that to happen, Mars needed to be habitable at the time when conditions were right.
So was Mars habitable? We have a number of missions telling us exactly the same thing today.
At the time when life appeared on the Earth, Mars did have an ocean, it had volcanoes, it had lakes, and it had deltas like the beautiful picture you see here.
This picture was sent by the Curiosity rover only a few weeks ago.
It shows the remnants of a delta, and this picture tells us something: water was abundant and stayed founting at the surface for a very long time.
and a couple of super-sketchy helicopter flights.
Life chemistry takes a long time to actually happen.
So this is extremely good news, but does that mean that if we go there, life will be easy to find on Mars? Not necessarily.
Here's what happened: At the time when life exploded at the surface of the Earth, then everything went south for Mars, literally.
The atmosphere was stripped away by solar winds, Mars lost its magnetosphere, and then cosmic rays and U.V. bombarded the surface and water escaped to space and went underground.
So if we want to be able to understand, if we want to be able to find those traces of the signatures of life at the surface of Mars, if they are there, we need to understand what was the impact of each of these events on the preservation of its record.
Only then will we be able to know where those signatures are hiding, and only then will we be able to send our rover to the right places where we can sample those rocks that may be telling us something really important about who we are, or, if not, maybe telling us that somewhere, independently, life has appeared on another planet.
So to do that, it's easy.
You only need to go back 3.5 billion years ago in the past of a planet.
We just need a time machine.
Easy, right? Well, actually, it is.
Look around you -- that's planet Earth.
This is our time machine.
Geologists are using it to go back in the past of our own planet.
I am using it a little bit differently.
I use planet Earth to go in very extreme environments where conditions were similar to those of Mars at the time when the climate changed, and there I'm trying to understand what happened.
What are the signatures of life? What is left? How are we going to find it? So for one moment now I'm going to take you with me on a trip into that time machine.
And now, what you see here, we are at 4,500 meters in the Andes, but in fact we are less than a billion years after the Earth and Mars formed.
The Earth and Mars will have looked pretty much exactly like that -- volcanoes everywhere, evaporating lakes everywhere, minerals, hot springs, and then you see those mounds on the shore of those lakes? Those are built by the descendants of the first organisms that gave us the first fossil on Earth.
But if we want to understand what's going on, we need to go a little further.
And the other thing about those sites is that exactly like on Mars three and a half billion years ago, the climate is changing very fast, and water and ice are disappearing.
and to do that, we need to go higher.
Why is that? the atmosphere is getting thinner, it's getting more unstable, the temperature is getting cooler, and you have a lot more U.V. radiation.
Basically, you are getting to those conditions on Mars when everything changed.
So I was not promising anything about a leisurely trip on the time machine.
You are not going to be sitting in that time machine.
You have to haul 1,000 pounds of equipment to the summit of this 20,000-foot volcano in the Andes here.
That's about 6,000 meters.
And you also have to sleep on 42-degree slopes and really hope that there won't be any earthquake that night.
But when we get to the summit, we actually find the lake we came for.
At this altitude, this lake is experiencing exactly the same conditions as those on Mars three and a half billion years ago.
And now we have to change our voyage into an inner voyage inside that lake, and to do that, we have to remove our mountain gear and actually don suits and go for it.
But at the time we enter that lake, at the very moment we enter that lake, we are stepping back three and a half billion years in the past of another planet, and then we are going to get the answer came for.
Life is everywhere, absolutely everywhere.
Everything you see in this picture is a living organism.
Maybe not so the diver, but everything else.
But this picture is very deceiving.
Life is abundant in those lakes, but like in many places on Earth right now and due to climate change, there is a huge loss in biodiversity.
In the samples that we took back home, 36 percent of the bacteria in those lakes were composed of three species, and those three species are the ones that have survived so far.
Here's another lake, right next to the first one.
The red color you see here is not due to minerals.
It's actually due to the presence of a tiny algae.
In this region, the U.V. radiation is really nasty.
Anywhere on Earth, 11 is considered to be extreme.
During U.V. storms there, the U.V. Index reaches 43.
SPF 30 is not going to do anything to you over there, and the water is so transparent in those lakes that the algae has nowhere to hide, really, and so they are developing their own sunscreen, and this is the red color you see.
But they can adapt only so far, and then when all the water is gone from the surface, microbes have only one solution left: They go underground.
And those microbes, the rocks you see in that slide here, well, they are actually living inside rocks and they are using the protection of the translucence of the rocks to get the good part of the U.V.
and discard the part that could actually damage their DNA.
And this is why we are taking our rover to train them to search for life on Mars in these areas, because if there was life on Mars three and a half billion years ago, it had to use the same strategy to actually protect itself.
Now, it is pretty obvious that going to extreme environments is helping us very much for the exploration of Mars and to prepare missions.
So far, it has helped us to understand the geology of Mars.
It has helped to understand the past climate of Mars and its evolution, but also its habitability potential.
Our most recent rover on Mars has discovered traces of organics.
Yeah, there are organics at the surface of Mars.
And it also discovered traces of methane.
And we don't know yet if the methane in question is really from geology or biology.
Regardless, what we know is that because of the discovery, the hypothesis that there is still life present on Mars today remains a viable one.
So by now, I think I have convinced you that Mars is very special to us, but it would be a mistake to think that Mars is the only place in the solar system that is interesting to find potential microbial life.
And the reason is because Mars and the Earth could have a common root to their tree of life, but when you go beyond Mars, it's not that easy.
Celestial mechanics is not making it so easy for an exchange of material between planets, and so if we were to discover life on those planets, it would be different from us.
It would be a different type of life.
Here's why.
it might be us and Mars, or it can be many trees of life in the solar system.
I don't know the answer yet, but I can tell you something: No matter what the result is, no matter what that magic number is, it is going to give us a standard by which we are going to be able to measure the life potential, abundance and diversity beyond our own solar system.
And this can be achieved by our generation.
This can be our legacy, but only if we dare to explore.
Now, finally, if somebody tells you that looking for alien microbes is not cool because you cannot have a philosophical conversation with them, let me show you why and how you can tell them they're wrong.
Well, organic material is going to tell you about environment, about complexity and about diversity.
DNA, or any information carrier, is going to tell you about adaptation, about evolution, about survival, about planetary changes and about the transfer of information.
All together, they are telling us what started as a microbial pathway, and why what started as a microbial pathway sometimes ends up as a civilization or sometimes ends up as a dead end.
Look at the solar system, and look at the Earth.
On Earth, there are many intelligent species, but only one has achieved technology.
Right here in the journey of our own solar system, there is a very, very powerful message that says here's how we should look for alien life, small and big.
So yeah, microbes are talking and we are listening, and they are taking us, one planet at a time and one moon at a time, towards their big brothers out there.
And they are telling us about diversity, they are telling us about abundance of life, and they are telling us how this life has survived thus far to reach civilization, intelligence, technology and, indeed, philosophy.
Thank you.
(Applause) This is a kindergarten we designed in 2007.
We made this kindergarten to be a circle.
It's a kind of endless circulation on top of the roof.
If you are a parent, you know that kids love to keep making circles.
This is how the rooftop looks.
And why did we design this? The principal of this kindergarten said, "No, I don't want a handrail." I said, "It's impossible." But he insisted: "How about having a net sticking out from the edge of the roof? So that it can catch the children falling off?" (Laughter) I said, "It's impossible." And of course, the government official said, "Of course you have to have a handrail." But we could keep that idea around the trees.
There are three trees popping through.
And we were allowed to call this rope as a handrail.
But of course, rope has nothing to do with them.
They fall into the net.
And you get more, and more, more.
(Laughter) Sometimes 40 children are around a tree.
The boy on the branch, he loves the tree so he is eating the tree.
(Laughter) And at the time of an event, they sit on the edge.
It looks so nice from underneath.
My fieldwork took me to the border region between Morocco and Algeria, (Laughter) Feeding time.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we made the roof as low as possible, because we wanted to see children on top of the roof, not only underneath the roof.
And if the roof is too high, you see only the ceiling.
And the leg washing place -- there are many kinds of water taps.
You see with the flexible tubes, you want to spray water to your friends, and the shower, and the one in front is quite normal.
But if you look at this, the boy is not washing his boots, he's putting water into his boots.
(Laughter) This kindergarten is completely open, most of the year.
And there is no boundary between inside and outside.
So it means basically this architecture is a roof.
And also there is no boundary between classrooms.
So there is no acoustic barrier at all.
When you put many children in a quiet box, some of them get really nervous.
But in this kindergarten, there is no reason they get nervous.
Because there is no boundary.
And the principal says if the boy in the corner doesn't want to stay in the room, we let him go.
He will come back eventually, because it's a circle, it comes back.
(Laughter) But the point is, in that kind of occasion, usually children try to hide somewhere.
But here, just they leave and come back.
It's a natural process.
And secondly, we consider noise very important.
You know that children sleep better in noise.
They don't sleep in a quiet space.
And in this kindergarten, these children show amazing concentration in class.
And you know, our kind grew up in the jungle with noise.
They need noise.
And you know, you can talk to your friends in a noisy bar.
You are not supposed to be in silence.
And you know, these days we are trying to make everything under control.
You know, it's completely open.
And you should know that we can go skiing in -20 degrees in winter.
In summer you go swimming.
The sand is 50 degrees.
And also, you should know that you are waterproof.
You never melt in rain.
So, children are supposed to be outside.
So that is how we should treat them.
This is how they divide classrooms.
They are supposed to help teachers.
They don't.
(Laughter) I didn't put him in.
A classroom.
And a washbasin.
They talk to each other around the well.
And there are always some trees in the classroom.
A monkey trying to fish another monkey from above.
(Laughter) Monkeys.
(Laughter) And each classroom has at least one skylight.
And this is where Santa Claus comes down at the time of Christmas.
This is the annex building, right next to that oval-shaped kindergarten.
The building is only five meters tall with seven floors.
And of course, the ceiling height is very low.
So you have to consider safety.
So, we put our children, a daughter and a son.
They tried to go in.
He hit his head.
He's okay. His skull is quite strong.
He is resilient. It's my son.
(Laughter) And he is trying to see if it is safe to jump off.
And then we put other children.
The traffic jam is awful in Tokyo, as you know.
(Laughter) The driver in front, she needs to learn how to drive.
Now these days, kids need a small dosage of danger.
And in this kind of occasion, they learn to help each other.
This is society. This is the kind of opportunity we are losing these days.
Now, this drawing is showing the movement of a boy between 9:10 and 9:30.
And the circumference of this building is 183 meters.
So it's not exactly small at all.
And this boy did 6,000 meters in the morning.
But the surprise is yet to come.
The children in this kindergarten do 4,000 meters on average.
And these children have the highest athletic abilities among many kindergartens.
The principal says, "I don't train them. We leave them on top of the roof.
Just like sheep." (Laughter) They keep running.
(Laughter) My point is don't control them, don't protect them too much, and they need to tumble sometimes.
They need to get some injury.
And that makes them learn how to live in this world.
I think architecture is capable of changing this world, and people's lives.
And this is one of the attempts to change the lives of children.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Today, I am going to talk about anger.
When I was 11, seeing some of my friends leaving the school because their parents could not afford textbooks made me angry.
When I was 27, hearing the plight of a desperate slave father whose daughter was about to be sold to a brothel made me angry.
At the age of 50, lying on the street, in a pool of blood, along with my own son, made me angry.
Dear friends, for centuries we were taught anger is bad.
Our parents, teachers, priests -- everyone taught us how to control and suppress our anger.
But I ask why? Why can't we convert our anger for the larger good of society? Why can't we use our anger to challenge and change the evils of the world? That I tried to do.
Friends, most of the brightest ideas came to my mind out of anger.
Like when I was 35 and sat in a locked-up, tiny prison.
The whole night, I was angry.
But it has given birth to a new idea.
But I will come to that later on.
Let me begin with the story of how I got a name for myself.
I had been a big admirer of Mahatma Gandhi since my childhood.
Gandhi fought and lead India's freedom movement.
But more importantly, he taught us how to treat the most vulnerable sections, the most deprived people, with dignity and respect.
And so, when India was celebrating at that time I was 15 -- an idea came to my mind.
Why can't we celebrate it differently? I knew, as perhaps many of you might know, that in India, a large number of people are born in the lowest segment of caste.
And they are treated as untouchables.
These are the people -- forget about allowing them to go to the temples, they cannot even go into the houses and shops of high-caste people.
So I was very impressed with the leaders of my town who were speaking very highly against the caste system and untouchability and talking of Gandhian ideals.
So inspired by that, I thought, let us set an example by inviting these people to eat food cooked and served by the untouchable community.
I went to some low-caste, so-called untouchable, people, tried to convince them, but it was unthinkable for them.
They told me, "No, no. It's not possible. It never happened." I said, "Look at these leaders, they are so great, they are against untouchability.
They will come. If nobody comes, we can set an example." These people thought that I was too naive.
Finally, they were convinced.
My friends and I took our bicycles and invited political leaders.
And I was so thrilled, rather, empowered to see that each one of them agreed to come.
I thought, "Great idea. We can set an example.
We can bring about change in the society." The day has come.
All these untouchables, three women and two men, they agreed to come.
I could recall that they had used the best of their clothes.
They brought new utensils.
They had taken baths hundreds of times because it was unthinkable for them to do.
It was the moment of change.
They gathered. Food was cooked.
It was 7 o'clock.
By 8 o'clock, we kept on waiting, because it's not very uncommon that the leaders become late, for an hour or so.
When the war ended, just to remind them.
One of the leader's wives told me, "Sorry, he is having some headache, perhaps he cannot come." I went to another leader and his wife told me, "Okay, you go, he will definitely join." So I thought that the dinner will take place, though not at that large a scale.
I went back to the venue, which was a newly built Mahatma Gandhi Park.
It was 10 o'clock.
None of the leaders showed up.
That made me angry.
I was standing, leaning against Mahatma Gandhi's statue.
I was emotionally drained, rather exhausted.
Then I sat down where the food was lying.
I kept my emotions on hold.
But then, when I took the first bite, I broke down in tears.
And suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder.
And it was the healing, motherly touch of an untouchable woman.
And she told me, "Kailash, why are you crying? You have done your bit.
You have eaten the food cooked by untouchables, which has never happened in our memory." She said, "You won today." And my friends, she was right.
I came back home, a little after midnight, shocked to see that several high-caste elderly people were sitting in my courtyard.
I saw my mother and elderly women were crying and they were pleading to these elderly people because they had threatened to outcaste my whole family.
And you know, outcasting the family is the biggest social punishment one can think of.
Somehow they agreed to punish only me, and the punishment was purification.
That means I had to go 600 miles away from my hometown to the River Ganges to take a holy dip.
And after that, I should organize a feast for priests, 101 priests, wash their feet and drink that water.
It was total nonsense, and I refused to accept that punishment.
How did they punish me? I was barred from entering into my own kitchen and my own dining room, my utensils were separated.
But the night when I was angry, they wanted to outcaste me.
But I decided to outcaste the entire caste system.
(Applause) And that was possible because the beginning would have been to change the family name, or surname, because in India, most of the family names are caste names.
So I decided to drop my name.
And then, later on, I gave a new name to myself: Satyarthi, that means, "seeker of truth." (Applause) And that was the beginning of my transformative anger.
Friends, maybe one of you can tell me, what was I doing before becoming a children's rights activist? Does anybody know? No.
I was an engineer, an electrical engineer.
And then I learned how the energy of burning fire, coal, the nuclear blast inside the chambers, raging river currents, fierce winds, could be converted into the light and lives of millions.
I also learned how the most uncontrollable form of energy could be harnessed for good and making society better.
So I'll come back to the story of when I was caught in the prison: I was very happy freeing a dozen children from slavery, handing them over to their parents.
I cannot explain my joy when I free a child.
I was so happy.
I saw that dozens of children were arriving; they were being trafficked by someone.
I stopped them, those people.
I complained to the police.
So the policemen, instead of helping me, they threw me in this small, tiny shell, like an animal.
And that was the night of anger when one of the brightest and biggest ideas was born.
I thought that if I keep on freeing 10 children, and 50 more will join, that's not done.
And I believed in the power of consumers, and let me tell you that this was the first time when a campaign was launched by me or anywhere in the world, to educate and sensitize the consumers to create a demand for child-labor-free rugs.
In Europe and America, we have been successful.
And it has resulted in a fall in child labor in South Asian countries by 80 percent.
(Applause) Not only that, but this first-ever consumer's power, or consumer's campaign has grown in other countries and other industries, maybe chocolate, maybe apparel, maybe shoes -- it has gone beyond.
My anger at the age of 11, when I realized how important education is for every child, I got an idea to collect used books and help the poorest children.
I created a book bank at the age of 11.
But I did not stop.
Later on, I cofounded the world's single largest civil society campaign for education that is the Global Campaign for Education.
That has helped in changing the whole thinking towards education from the charity mode to the human rights mode, and that has concretely helped the reduction of out-of-school children by half in the last 15 years.
(Applause) My anger at the age of 27, to free that girl who was about to be sold to a brothel, has given me an idea to go for a new strategy of raid and rescue, freeing children from slavery.
And I am so lucky and proud to say that it is not one or 10 or 20, but my colleagues and I have been able to physically liberate 83,000 child slaves and hand them over back to their families and mothers.
(Applause) I knew that we needed global policies.
We organized the worldwide marches against child labor and that has also resulted in a new international convention to protect the children who are in the worst forms.
And the concrete result was that the number of child laborers globally has gone down by one third in the last 15 years.
(Applause) So, in each case, it began from anger, turned into an idea, and action.
So anger, what next? Idea, and -- Audience: Action Kailash Satyarthi: Anger, idea, action. Which I tried to do.
Anger is a power, anger is an energy, and the law of nature is that energy can never be created and never be vanished, can never be destroyed.
So why can't the energy of anger be translated and harnessed to create a better and beautiful world, a more just and equitable world? Anger is within each one of you, and I will share a secret for a few seconds: that if we are confined in the narrow shells of egos, and the circles of selfishness, then the anger will turn out to be hatred, violence, revenge, destruction.
But if we are able to break the circles, then the same anger could turn into a great power.
We can break the circles by using our inherent compassion and connect with the world through compassion to make this world better.
That same anger could be transformed into it.
So dear friends, sisters and brothers, again, as a Nobel Laureate, I am urging you to become angry.
I am urging you to become angry.
And the angriest among us is the one who can transform his anger into idea and action.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: For many years, you've been an inspiration to others.
Who or what inspires you and why? each time when I free a child, the child who has lost all his hope that he will ever come back to his mother, the first smile of freedom, and the mother who has lost all hope that the son or daughter can ever come back and sit in her lap, they become so emotional and the first tear of joy rolls down on her cheek, I see the glimpse of God in it -- this is my biggest inspiration.
And I am so lucky that not once, as I said before, but thousands of times, I have been able to witness my God in the faces of those children and they are my biggest inspirations.
Thank you.
(Applause) I am a Hazara, and the homeland of my people is Afghanistan.
Like hundreds of thousands of other Hazara kids, I was born in exile.
The ongoing persecution and operation against the Hazaras forced my parents to leave Afghanistan.
This persecution has had a long history going back to the late 1800s, and the rule of King Abdur Rahman.
He killed 63 percent of the Hazara population.
He built minarets with their heads.
Many Hazaras were sold into slavery, and many others fled the country for neighboring Iran and Pakistan.
My parents also fled to Pakistan, and settled in Quetta, where I was born.
After the September 11 attack on the Twin Towers, I got a chance to go to Afghanistan for the first time, with foreign journalists.
I was only 18, and I got a job working as an interpreter.
After four years, and I was working there as a documentary photographer, and I worked on many stories.
One of the most important stories that I did was the dancing boys of Afghanistan.
It is a tragic story about an appalling tradition.
It involves young kids dancing for warlords and powerful men in the society.
These boys are often abducted or bought from their poor parents, and they are put to work as sex slaves.
This is Shukur.
He was kidnapped from Kabul by a warlord.
He was taken to another province, where he was forced to work as a sex slave for the warlord and his friends.
When this story was published in the Washington Post, I started receiving death threats, and I was forced to leave Afghanistan, as my parents were.
Along with my family, I returned back to Quetta.
The situation in Quetta had changed dramatically since I left in 2005.
Once a peaceful haven for the Hazaras, it had now turned into the most dangerous city in Pakistan.
Hazaras are confined into two small areas, and they are marginalized socially, educationally, and financially.
This is Nadir.
I had known him since my childhood.
He was injured when his van was ambushed by terrorists in Quetta.
He later died of his injuries.
Around 1,600 Hazara members had been killed in various attacks, and around 3,000 of them were injured, and many of them permanently disabled.
The attacks on the Hazara community would only get worse, so it was not surprising that many wanted to flee.
After Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, Australia is home to the fourth largest population of Hazaras in the world.
When it came time to leave Pakistan, Australia seemed the obvious choice.
Financially, only one of us could leave, and it was decided that I would go, in the hope that if I arrived at my destination safely, I could work to get the rest of my family to join me later.
We all knew about the risks, and how terrifying the journey is, and I met many people who lost loved ones at sea.
It was a desperate decision to take, to leave everything behind, and no one makes this decision easily.
If I had been able to simply fly to Australia, it would have taken me less than 24 hours.
But getting a visa was impossible.
My journey was much longer, much more complicated, and certainly more dangerous, traveling to Thailand by air, and then by road and boat to Malaysia and into Indonesia, paying people and smugglers all the way and spending a lot of time hiding and a lot of time in fear of being caught.
In Indonesia, I joined a group of seven asylum seekers.
We all shared a bedroom in a town outside of Jakarta called Bogor.
After spending a week in Bogor, three of my roommates left for the perilous journey, and we got the news two days later that a distressed boat sank in the sea en route to Christmas Island.
We found out that our three roommates -- Nawroz, Jaffar and Shabbir -- were also among those.
Only Jaffar was rescued.
Shabbir and Nawroz were never seen again.
It made me think, am I doing the right thing? I concluded I really had no other choice but to go on.
A few weeks later, we got the call from the people smuggler to alert us that the boat is ready for us to commence our sea journey.
Taken in the night towards the main vessel on a motorboat, we boarded an old fishing boat that was already overloaded.
There were 93 of us, and we were all below deck.
No one was allowed up on the top.
We all paid 6,000 dollars each for this part of the trip.
The first night and day went smoothly, but by the second night, the weather turned.
Waves tossed the boat around, and the timbers groaned.
People below deck were crying, praying, recalling their loved ones.
They were screaming.
It was a terrible moment.
It was like a scene from doomsday, or maybe like one of those scenes from those Hollywood movies that shows that everything is breaking apart and the world is just ending.
It was happening to us for real.
We didn't have any hope.
Our boat was floating like a matchbox on the water without any control.
The waves were much higher than our boat, and the water poured in faster than the motor pumps could take it out.
We all lost hope.
We thought, this is the end.
We were watching our deaths, and I was documenting it.
The captain told us that we are not going to make it, we have to turn back the boat.
We went on the deck and turned our torches on and off to attract the attention of any passing boat.
We kept trying to attract their attention by waving our life jackets and whistling.
Eventually, we made it to a small island.
Our boat crashing onto the rocks, I slipped into the water and destroyed my camera, whatever I had documented.
But luckily, the memory card survived.
It was a thick forest.
We all split up into many groups as we argued over what to do next.
We were all scared and confused.
Then, after spending the night on the beach, we found a jetty and coconuts.
We hailed a boat from a nearby resort, and then were quickly handed over to Indonesian water police.
At Serang Detention Center, an immigration officer came and furtively strip-searched us.
He took our mobile, my $300 cash, our shoes that we should not be able to escape, but we kept watching the guards, checking their movements, and around 4 a.m. when they sat around a fire, we removed two glass layers from an outside facing window and slipped through.
We climbed a tree next to an outer wall that was topped with the shards of glass.
We put the pillow on that and wrapped our forearms with bedsheets and climbed the wall, and we ran away with bare feet.
I was free, with an uncertain future, no money.
The only thing I had was the memory card with the pictures and footage.
When my documentary was aired on SBS Dateline, many of my friends came to know about my situation, and they tried to help me.
They did not allow me to take any other boat to risk my life.
I also decided to stay in Indonesia and process my case through UNHCR, but I was really afraid that I would end up in Indonesia for many years doing nothing and unable to work, like every other asylum seeker.
But it had happened to be a little bit different with me.
I was lucky.
My contacts worked to expedite my case through UNHCR, and I got resettled in Australia in May 2013.
Not every asylum seeker is lucky like me.
It is really difficult to live a life with an uncertain fate, in limbo.
The issue of asylum seekers in Australia has been so extremely politicized that it has lost its human face.
The asylum seekers have been demonized and then presented to the people.
I hope my story and the story of other Hazaras could shed some light to show the people how these people are suffering in their countries of origin, and how they suffer, why they risk their lives to seek asylum.
Thank you.
(Applause) Imagine you're in a bar, or a club, and you start talking, and after a while, the question comes up, "So, what do you do for work?" And since you think your job is interesting, you say, "I'm a mathematician." (Laughter) And inevitably, during that conversation one of these two phrases come up: A) "I was terrible at math, but it wasn't my fault.
It's because the teacher was awful." (Laughter) Or B) "But what is math really for?" (Laughter) I'll now address Case B.
(Laughter) When someone asks you what math is for, they're not asking you about applications of mathematical science.
I didn't want to be a storyteller when I grew up, I wanted to be stuntman.
why did I have to study that bullshit I never used in my life again? (Laughter) That's what they're actually asking.
So when mathematicians are asked what math is for, they tend to fall into two groups: 54.51 percent of mathematicians will assume an attacking position, and 44.77 percent of mathematicians will take a defensive position.
There's a strange 0.8 percent, among which I include myself.
Who are the ones that attack? The attacking ones are mathematicians who would tell you this question makes no sense, because mathematics have a meaning all their own -- a beautiful edifice with its own logic -- and that there's no point in constantly searching for all possible applications.
What's the use of poetry? What's the use of love? What's the use of life itself? What kind of question is that? (Laughter) Hardy, for instance, was a model of this type of attack.
And those who stand in defense tell you, "Even if you don't realize it, friend, math is behind everything." (Laughter) Those guys, they always bring up bridges and computers.
"If you don't know math, your bridge will collapse." (Laughter) It's true, computers are all about math.
And now these guys have also started saying that behind information security and credit cards are prime numbers.
These are the answers your math teacher would give you if you asked him.
He's one of the defensive ones.
but I don't think anybody thought that was going to happen.
Those who say that math doesn't need to have a purpose, or those who say that math is behind everything we do? Actually, both are right.
But remember I told you I belong to that strange 0.8 percent claiming something else? So, go ahead, ask me what math is for.
Audience: What is math for? Eduardo Senz de Cabezn: Okay, 76.34 percent of you asked the question, 23.41 percent didn't say anything, and the 0.8 percent -- I'm not sure what those guys are doing.
Well, to my dear 76.31 percent -- it's true that math doesn't need to serve a purpose, it's true that it's a beautiful structure, a logical one, probably one of the greatest collective efforts ever achieved in human history.
But it's also true that there, where scientists and technicians are looking for mathematical theories that allow them to advance, they're within the structure of math, which permeates everything.
It's true that we have to go somewhat deeper, to see what's behind science.
Science operates on intuition, creativity.
Math controls intuition and tames creativity.
Almost everyone who hasn't heard this before is surprised when they hear that if you take a 0.1 millimeter thick sheet of paper, the size we normally use, and, if it were big enough, fold it 50 times, its thickness would extend almost the distance from the Earth to the sun.
Your intuition tells you it's impossible.
Do the math and you'll see it's right.
That's what math is for.
It's true that science, all types of science, only makes sense because it makes us better understand this beautiful world we live in.
And in doing that, it helps us avoid the pitfalls of this painful world we live in.
There are sciences that help us in this way quite directly.
Oncological science, for example.
And there are others we look at from afar, with envy sometimes, but knowing that we are what supports them.
All the basic sciences support them, including math.
All that makes science, science is the rigor of math.
And that rigor factors in because its results are eternal.
You probably said or were told at some point that diamonds are forever, right? That depends on your definition of forever! A theorem -- that really is forever.
(Laughter) The Pythagorean theorem is still true even though Pythagoras is dead, I assure you it's true. (Laughter) Even if the world collapsed the Pythagorean theorem would still be true.
Wherever any two triangle sides and a good hypotenuse get together (Laughter) the Pythagorean theorem goes all out. It works like crazy.
(Applause) Well, we mathematicians devote ourselves to come up with theorems.
Eternal truths.
But it isn't always easy to know the difference between an eternal truth, or theorem, and a mere conjecture.
You need proof.
For example, let's say I have a big, enormous, infinite field.
I want to cover it with equal pieces, without leaving any gaps.
I could use squares, right? I could use triangles. Not circles, those leave little gaps.
Which is the best shape to use? One that covers the same surface, but has a smaller border.
In the year 300, Pappus of Alexandria said the best is to use hexagons, just like bees do.
But he didn't prove it.
The guy said, "Hexagons, great! Let's go with hexagons!" He didn't prove it, it remained a conjecture.
"Hexagons!" And the world, as you know, split into Pappists and anti-Pappists, until 1700 years later when in 1999, Thomas Hales proved that Pappus and the bees were right -- the best shape to use was the hexagon.
And that became a theorem, the honeycomb theorem, that will be true forever and ever, for longer than any diamond you may have. (Laughter) But what happens if we go to three dimensions? If I want to fill the space with equal pieces, without leaving any gaps, I can use cubes, right? Not spheres, those leave little gaps. (Laughter) What is the best shape to use? Lord Kelvin, of the famous Kelvin degrees and all, said that the best was to use a truncated octahedron which, as you all know -- (Laughter) -- is this thing here! (Applause) Come on.
Who doesn't have a truncated octahedron at home? (Laughter) Even a plastic one.
"Honey, get the truncated octahedron, we're having guests." Everybody has one! (Laughter) But Kelvin didn't prove it.
It remained a conjecture -- Kelvin's conjecture.
The world, as you know, then split into Kelvinists and anti-Kelvinists (Laughter) until a hundred or so years later, someone found a better structure.
Weaire and Phelan found this little thing over here -- (Laughter) -- this structure to which they gave the very clever name "the Weaire-Phelan structure." (Laughter) It looks like a strange object, but it isn't so strange, it also exists in nature.
It's very interesting that this structure, because of its geometric properties, was used to build the Aquatics Center for the Beijing Olympic Games.
There, Michael Phelps won eight gold medals, and became the best swimmer of all time.
Well, until someone better comes along, right? As may happen with the Weaire-Phelan structure.
It's the best until something better shows up.
But be careful, because this one really stands a chance that in a hundred or so years, or even if it's in 1700 years, that someone proves it's the best possible shape for the job.
It will then become a theorem, a truth, forever and ever.
For longer than any diamond.
So, if you want to tell someone that you will love them forever you can give them a diamond.
But if you want to tell them that you'll love them forever and ever, give them a theorem! (Laughter) But hang on a minute! You'll have to prove it, so your love doesn't remain a conjecture.
(Applause) I dedicated the past two years to understanding how people achieve their dreams.
When we think about the dreams we have, and the dent we want to leave in the universe, it is striking to see how big of an overlap there is between the dreams that we have and projects that never happen.
(Laughter) So I'm here to talk to you today about five ways how not to follow your dreams.
One: Believe in overnight success.
You know the story, right? The tech guy built a mobile app and sold it very fast for a lot of money.
You know, the story may seem real, but I bet it's incomplete.
If you go investigate further, the guy has done 30 apps before and he has done a master's on the topic, a Ph.D.
He has been working on the topic for 20 years.
This is really interesting, I myself have a story in Brazil that people think is an overnight success.
I come from a humble family, and two weeks before the deadline to apply to MIT, I started the application process.
And, voila! I got in.
People may think it's an overnight success, but that only worked because for the 17 years prior to that, I took life and education seriously.
Your overnight success story is always a result of everything you've done in your life through that moment.
Two: Believe someone else has the answers for you.
Constantly, people want to help out, right? All sorts of people: your family, your friends, your business partners, they all have opinions on which path you should take: "And let me tell you, go through this pipe." But whenever you go inside, there are other ways you have to pick as well.
And you need to make those decisions yourself.
No one else has the perfect answers for your life.
And you need to keep picking those decisions, right? The pipes are infinite and you're going to bump your head, and it's a part of the process.
Three, and it's very subtle but very important: Decide to settle when growth is guaranteed.
So when your life is going great, than there were U.S. military troops? and you have growing revenue, and everything is set -- time to settle.
When I launched my first book, I worked really, really hard to distribute it everywhere in Brazil.
With that, over three million people downloaded it, over 50,000 people bought physical copies.
When I wrote a sequel, some impact was guaranteed.
Even if I did little, sales would be okay.
But okay is never okay.
When you're growing towards a peak, you need to work harder than ever and find yourself another peak.
Maybe if I did little, a couple hundred thousand people would read it, and that's great already.
But if I work harder than ever, I can bring this number up to millions.
That's why I decided, with my new book, to go to every single state of Brazil.
And I can already see a higher peak.
There's no time to settle down.
Fourth tip, and that's really important: Believe the fault is someone else's.
I constantly see people saying, "Yes, I had this great idea, but no investor had the vision to invest." "Oh, I created this great product, but the market is so bad, the sales didn't go well." Or, "I can't find good talent; my team is so below expectations." If you have dreams, it's your responsibility to make them happen.
Yes, it may be hard to find talent.
Yes, the market may be bad.
But if no one invested in your idea, if no one bought your product, for sure, there is something there that is your fault.
(Laughter) Definitely.
You need to get your dreams and make them happen.
And no one achieved their goals alone.
But if you didn't make them happen, it's your fault and no one else's.
Be responsible for your dreams.
And one last tip, and this one is really important as well: Believe that the only things that matter are the dreams themselves.
Once I saw an ad, and it was a lot of friends, they were going up a mountain, it was a very high mountain, You could see that they were sweating and this was tough.
And they were going up, and they finally made it to the peak.
Of course, they decided to celebrate, right? I'm going to celebrate, so, "Yes! We made it, we're at the top!" Two seconds later, one looks at the other and says, "Okay, let's go down." (Laughter) Life is never about the goals themselves.
Life is about the journey.
Yes, you should enjoy the goals themselves, but people think that you have dreams, and whenever you get to reaching one of those dreams, it's a magical place where happiness will be all around.
But achieving a dream is a momentary sensation, and your life is not.
The only way to really achieve all of your dreams is to fully enjoy every step of your journey.
That's the best way.
And your journey is simple -- it's made of steps.
Some steps will be right on.
Sometimes you will trip.
If it's right on, celebrate, because some people wait a lot to celebrate.
And if you tripped, turn that into something to learn.
If every step becomes something to learn or something to celebrate, you will for sure enjoy the journey.
So, five tips: Believe in overnight success, believe someone else has the answers for you, believe that when growth is guaranteed, you should settle down, believe the fault is someone else's, and believe that only the goals themselves matter.
Believe me, if you do that, you will destroy your dreams.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
When I was a kid, the disaster we worried about most was a nuclear war.
filled with cans of food and water.
When the nuclear attack came, we were supposed to go downstairs, hunker down, and eat out of that barrel.
Today the greatest risk of global catastrophe doesn't look like this.
Instead, it looks like this.
If anything kills over 10 million people in the next few decades, it's most likely to be a highly infectious virus rather than a war.
Not missiles, but microbes.
Now, part of the reason for this is that we've invested a huge amount in nuclear deterrents.
But we've actually invested very little in a system to stop an epidemic.
We're not ready for the next epidemic.
Let's look at Ebola.
I'm sure all of you read about it in the newspaper, lots of tough challenges.
I followed it carefully through the case analysis tools we use to track polio eradication.
And as you look at what went on, the problem wasn't that there was a system that didn't work well enough, the problem was that we didn't have a system at all.
In fact, there's some pretty obvious key missing pieces.
We didn't have a group of epidemiologists ready to go, who would have gone, seen what the disease was, seen how far it had spread.
The case reports came in on paper.
It was very delayed before they were put online and they were extremely inaccurate.
We didn't have a medical team ready to go.
We didn't have a way of preparing people.
Now, Mdecins Sans Frontires did a great job orchestrating volunteers.
But even so, we were far slower than we should have been getting the thousands of workers into these countries.
And a large epidemic would require us to have hundreds of thousands of workers.
There was no one there to look at treatment approaches.
No one to look at the diagnostics.
No one to figure out what tools should be used.
As an example, we could have taken the blood of survivors, processed it, and put that plasma back in people to protect them.
But that was never tried.
So there was a lot that was missing.
And these things are really a global failure.
The WHO is funded to monitor epidemics, but not to do these things I talked about.
Now, in the movies it's quite different.
There's a group of handsome epidemiologists ready to go, they move in, they save the day, but that's just pure Hollywood.
The failure to prepare could allow the next epidemic to be dramatically more devastating than Ebola Let's look at the progression of Ebola over this year.
About 10,000 people died, and nearly all were in the three West African countries.
There's three reasons why it didn't spread more.
The first is that there was a lot of heroic work by the health workers.
They found the people and they prevented more infections.
The second is the nature of the virus.
Ebola does not spread through the air.
And by the time you're contagious, most people are so sick that they're bedridden.
Third, it didn't get into many urban areas.
And that was just luck.
If it had gotten into a lot more urban areas, the case numbers would have been much larger.
So next time, we might not be so lucky.
You can have a virus where people feel well enough while they're infectious that they get on a plane or they go to a market.
So I decided to start a lawsuit against them, or it could be bioterrorism.
So there are things that would literally make things a thousand times worse.
In fact, let's look at a model of a virus spread through the air, like the Spanish Flu back in 1918.
So here's what would happen: It would spread throughout the world very, very quickly.
And you can see over 30 million people died from that epidemic.
So this is a serious problem.
We should be concerned.
But in fact, we can build a really good response system.
We have the benefits of all the science and technology that we talk about here.
We've got cell phones to get information from the public and get information out to them.
We have satellite maps where we can see where people are and where they're moving.
We have advances in biology that should dramatically change the turnaround time to look at a pathogen and be able to make drugs and vaccines that fit for that pathogen.
So we can have tools, but those tools need to be put into an overall global health system.
And we need preparedness.
The best lessons, I think, on how to get prepared are again, what we do for war.
For soldiers, we have full-time, waiting to go.
We have reserves that can scale us up to large numbers.
NATO has a mobile unit that can deploy very rapidly.
NATO does a lot of war games to check, are people well trained? Do they understand about fuel and logistics and the same radio frequencies? So they are absolutely ready to go.
So those are the kinds of things we need to deal with an epidemic.
What are the key pieces? First, we need strong health systems in poor countries.
That's where mothers can give birth safely, kids can get all their vaccines.
But, also where we'll see the outbreak very early on.
We need a medical reserve corps: lots of people who've got the training and background who are ready to go, with the expertise.
And then we need to pair those medical people with the military.
taking advantage of the military's ability to move fast, do logistics and secure areas.
We need to do simulations, germ games, not war games, so that we see where the holes are.
The last time a germ game was done in the United States was back in 2001, and it didn't go so well.
So far the score is germs: 1, people: 0.
Finally, we need lots of advanced R&D in areas of vaccines and diagnostics.
There are some big breakthroughs, like the Adeno-associated virus, that could work very, very quickly.
Now I don't have an exact budget for what this would cost, but I'm quite sure it's very modest compared to the potential harm.
The World Bank estimates that if we have a worldwide flu epidemic, global wealth will go down by over three trillion dollars and we'd have millions and millions of deaths.
These investments offer significant benefits beyond just being ready for the epidemic.
The primary healthcare, the R&D, those things would reduce global health equity and make the world more just as well as more safe.
So I think this should absolutely be a priority.
There's no need to panic.
We don't have to hoard cans of spaghetti or go down into the basement.
But we need to get going, because time is not on our side.
In fact, if there's one positive thing that can come out of the Ebola epidemic, it's that it can serve as an early warning, a wake-up call, to get ready.
If we start now, we can be ready for the next epidemic.
Thank you.
(Applause) People back home call me a heckler, a troublemaker, an irritant, a rebel, an activist, the voice of the people.
But that wasn't always me.
Growing up, I had a nickname.
as we call ourselves, meaning the soft, harmless boy.
Like every other human being, I avoided trouble.
In my childhood, they taught me silence.
Don't argue, do as you're told.
In Sunday school, they taught me don't confront, don't argue, even if you're right, turn the other cheek.
This was reinforced by the political climate of the time.
(Laughter) Kenya is a country where you are guilty until proven rich.
(Laughter) Kenya's poor are five times more likely to be shot dead by the police who are meant to protect them than by criminals.
This was reinforced by the political climate of the day.
We had a president, Moi, who was a dictator.
He ruled the country with an iron fist, and anyone who dared question his authority was arrested, tortured, jailed or even killed.
That meant that people were taught to be smart cowards, stay out of trouble.
Being a coward was not an insult.
Being a coward was a compliment.
We used to be told that a coward goes home to his mother.
What that meant: that if you stayed out of trouble you're going to stay alive.
I used to question this advice, and eight years ago we had an election in Kenya, and the results were violently disputed.
What followed that election was terrible violence, rape, and the killing of over 1,000 people.
My work was to document the violence.
As a photographer, I took thousands of images, and after two months, the two politicians came together, had a cup of tea, signed a peace agreement, and the country moved on.
I was a very disturbed man because I saw the violence firsthand.
I saw the killings. I saw the displacement.
I met women who had been raped, and it disturbed me, but the country never spoke about it.
We pretended. We all became smart cowards.
We decided to stay out of trouble and not talk about it.
Ten months later, I quit my job. I said I could not stand it anymore.
After quitting my job, I decided to organize my friends to speak about the violence in the country, to speak about the state of the nation, and June 1, 2009 was the day that we were meant to go to the stadium and try and get the president's attention.
It's a national holiday, it's broadcast across the country, For anybody who has gone to a spa knows how much microbes like that, right? My friends did not show up.
I found myself alone, and I didn't know what to do.
I was scared, but I knew very well that that particular day, I had to make a decision.
Was I able to live as a coward, like everyone else, or was I going to make a stand? And when the president stood up to speak, I found myself on my feet shouting at the president, telling him to remember the post-election violence victims, to stop the corruption.
And suddenly, out of nowhere, the police pounced on me like hungry lions.
They held my mouth and dragged me out of the stadium, where they thoroughly beat me up and locked me up in jail.
I spent that night in a cold cement floor in the jail, and that got me thinking.
What was making me feel this way? My friends and family thought I was crazy because of what I did, and the images that I took were disturbing my life.
The images that I took were just a number to many Kenyans.
Most Kenyans did not see the violence.
It was a story to them.
And so I decided to actually start a street exhibition to show the images of the violence across the country and get people talking about it.
We traveled the country and showed the images, and this was a journey that has started me to the activist path, where I decided to become silent no more, to talk about those things.
We traveled, and our general site from our street exhibit became for political graffiti about the situation in the country, talking about corruption, bad leadership.
We have even done symbolic burials.
We have delivered live pigs to Kenya's parliament as a symbol of our politicians' greed.
It has been done in Uganda and other countries, and what is most powerful is that the images have been picked by the media and amplified across the country, across the continent.
Where I used to stand up alone seven years ago, now I belong to a community of many people who stand up with me.
I am no longer alone when I stand up to speak about these things.
I belong to a group of young people who are passionate about the country, who want to bring about change, and they're no longer afraid, and they're no longer smart cowards.
So that was my story.
That day in the stadium, I stood up as a smart coward.
By that one action, I said goodbye to the 24 years living as a coward.
There are two most powerful days in your life: the day you're born, and the day you discover why.
That day standing up in that stadium shouting at the President, I discovered why I was truly born, that I would no longer be silent in the face of injustice.
Do you know why you were born? Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: It's an amazing story.
I just want to ask you a couple quick questions.
So PAWA254: you've created a studio, a place where young people can go and harness the power of digital media to do some of this action.
What's happening now with PAWA? Boniface Mwangi: So we have this community of filmmakers, graffiti artists, musicians, and when there's an issue in the country, we come together, we brainstorm, and take up on that issue.
So our most powerful tool is art, because we live in a very busy world where people are so busy in their life, and they don't have time to read.
So we package our activism and we package our message in art.
So from the music, the graffiti, the art, that's what we do.
Can I say one more thing? TR: Yeah, of course. (Applause) BM: In spite of being arrested, beaten up, threatened, the moment I discovered my voice, that I could actually stand up for what I really believed in, I'm no longer afraid.
I used to be called softy, but I'm no longer softy, because I discovered who I really am, as in, that's what I want to do, and there's such beauty in doing that.
There's nothing as powerful as that, knowing that I'm meant to do this, because you don't get scared, you just continue living your life.
Thank you.
(Applause) When I was growing up, I really liked playing hide-and-seek a lot.
I was born with bilateral retinoblastoma, retinal cancer.
My right eye was removed at seven months of age.
I was 13 months when they removed my left eye.
The first thing I did upon awakening from that last surgery was to climb out of my crib the air we breathe, the water we drink, probably looking for the one who did this to me.
(Laughter) Evidently, wandering around the nursery was not a problem for me without eyes.
The problem was getting caught.
It's impressions about blindness that are far more threatening to blind people than the blindness itself.
because expectations do change our physiology.
Think about your reactions when I first came onto the stage, or the prospect of your own blindness, or a loved one going blind.
The terror is incomprehensible to most of us, because blindness is thought to epitomize ignorance and unawareness, hapless exposure to the ravages of the dark unknown.
How poetic.
Fortunately for me, my parents were not poetic.
They were pragmatic.
They understood that ignorance and fear were but matters of the mind, and the mind is adaptable.
They believed that I should grow up to enjoy the same freedoms and responsibilities as everyone else.
In their own words, I would move out -- which I did when I was 18 -- I will pay taxes -- thanks -- (Laughter) -- and they knew the difference between love and fear.
Fear immobilizes us in the face of challenge.
They knew that blindness would pose a significant challenge.
I was not raised with fear.
They put my freedom first before all else, because that is what love does.
Now, moving forward, how do I manage today? The world is a much larger nursery.
Fortunately, I have my trusty long cane, longer than the canes used by most blind people.
I call it my freedom staff.
It will keep me, for example, from making an undignified departure from the stage. (Laughter) I do see that cliff edge.
They warned us earlier that every imaginable mishap has occurred to speakers up here on the stage.
I don't care to set a new precedent.
But beyond that, many of you may have heard me clicking as I came onto the stage -- (Clicking) -- with my tongue.
Those are flashes of sound that go out and reflect from surfaces all around me, just like a bat's sonar, and return to me with patterns, with pieces of information, much as light does for you.
And my brain, thanks to my parents, has been activated to form images in my visual cortex, which we now call the imaging system, from those patterns of information, much as your brain does.
I call this process flash sonar.
It is how I have learned to see through my blindness, to navigate my journey through the dark unknowns of my own challenges, which has earned me the moniker "the remarkable Batman." Now, Batman I will accept.
Bats are cool. Batman is cool.
But I was not raised to think of myself as in any way remarkable.
I have always regarded myself much like anyone else who navigates the dark unknowns of their own challenges.
Is that so remarkable? I do not use my eyes, I use my brain.
Now, someone, somewhere, must think that's remarkable, or I wouldn't be up here, but let's consider this for a moment.
Everyone out there who faces or who has ever faced a challenge, raise your hands.
Whoosh. Okay.
Lots of hands going up, a moment, let me do a head count.
(Clicking) This will take a while. (Clicking) (Laughter) Okay, lots of hands in the air.
Keep them up. I have an idea.
Those of you who use your brains to navigate these challenges, put your hands down.
Okay, anyone with your hands still up has challenges of your own. (Laughter) So we all face challenges, and we all face the dark unknown, which is endemic to most challenges, which is what most of us fear, okay? But we all have brains that allow us, that activate to allow us to navigate the journey through these challenges. Okay? Case in point: I came up here and -- (Clicking) -- they wouldn't tell me where the lectern was.
So you can't trust those TED folks.
"Find it yourself," they said.
So -- (Laughter) And the feedback for the P.A. system is no help at all.
So now I present to you a challenge.
So if you'd all close your eyes for just a moment, okay? And you're going to learn a bit of flash sonar.
or if you think it's posed.
I'm going to hold this panel in front of me, but I'm not going to move it.
Just listen to the sound for a moment.
Shhhhhhhhhh.
Okay, nothing very interesting.
Now, listen to what happens to that same exact sound when I move the panel.
Shhhhhhhhhhh. (Pitch getting higher and lower) You do not know the power of the dark side.
(Laughter) I couldn't resist.
Okay, now keep your eyes closed because, did you hear the difference? Okay. Now, let's be sure.
For your challenge, you tell me, just say "now" when you hear the panel start to move.
Okay? We'll relax into this.
Shhhhhhh.
Audience: Now. Daniel Kish: Good. Excellent.
Open your eyes.
All right. So just a few centimeters, you would notice the difference.
You've experienced sonar.
You'd all make great blind people. (Laughter) Let's have a look at what can happen when this activation process (Video) Juan Ruiz: It's like you guys can see with your eyes and we can see with our ears.
Brian Bushway: It's not a matter of enjoying it more or less, it's about enjoying it differently.
Shawn Marsolais: It goes across. DK: Yeah.
SM: And then it's gradually coming back down again.
DK: Yes! SM: That's amazing.
I can, like, see the car. Holy mother! It's extremely good at using available means to achieve a state If I had the opportunity, honestly, I wouldn't go back to being sighted.
JR: The bigger the goal, the more obstacles you'll face, and on the other side of that goal is victory.
[In Italian] (Applause) DK: Now, do these people look terrified? Not so much.
We have delivered activation training to tens of thousands of blind and sighted people from all backgrounds in nearly 40 countries.
When blind people learn to see, sighted people seem inspired to want to learn to see their way better, more clearly, with less fear, because this exemplifies the immense capacity within us all to navigate any type of challenge, through any form of darkness, to discoveries unimagined when we are activated.
I wish you all a most activating journey.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Daniel, my friend.
As I know you can see, it's a spectacular standing ovation at TED.
Thank you for an extraordinary talk.
Just one more question about your world, your inner world that you construct.
We think that we have things in our world that you as a blind person don't have, but what's your world like? What do you have that we don't have? DK: Three hundred and sixty-degree view, so my sonar works about as well behind me as it does in front of me.
It works around corners.
It works through surfaces.
Generally, it's kind of a fuzzy three-dimensional geometry.
One of my students, who has now become an instructor, when he lost his vision, after a few months he was sitting in his three story house and he realized that he could hear everything going on throughout the house: conversations, people in the kitchen, people in the bathroom, several floors away, several walls away.
He said it was something like having x-ray vision.
CA: What do you picture that you're in right now? How do you picture this theater? DK: Lots of loudspeakers, quite frankly.
It's interesting. When people make a sound, when they laugh, when they fidget, when they take a drink or blow their nose or whatever, I hear everything.
I hear every little movement that every single person makes.
None of it really escapes my attention, and then, from a sonar perspective, the size of the room, the curvature of the audience around the stage, it's the height of the room.
Like I say, it's all that kind of three-dimensional surface geometry all around me.
CA: Well, Daniel, you have done a spectacular job of helping us all see the world in a different way.
Thanks so much for that, truly. DK: Thank you.
(Applause) I'd like to tell you a story about death and architecture.
A hundred years ago, we tended to die of infectious diseases like pneumonia, that, if they took hold, would take us away quite quickly.
We tended to die at home, in our own beds, looked after by family, although that was the default option because a lot of people lacked access to medical care.
And then in the 20th century a lot of things changed.
We developed new medicines like penicillin so we could treat those infectious diseases.
New medical technologies like x-ray machines were invented.
And because they were so big and expensive, we needed large, centralized buildings to keep them in, and they became our modern hospitals.
After the Second World War, a lot of countries set up universal healthcare systems so that everyone who needed treatment could get it.
The result was that lifespans extended from about 45 at the start of the century to almost double that today.
The 20th century was this time of huge optimism about what science could offer, but with all of the focus on life, death was forgotten, even as our approach to death changed dramatically.
Now, I'm an architect, and for the past year and a half I've been looking at these changes and at what they mean for architecture related to death and dying.
We now tend to die of cancer and heart disease, and what that means is that many of us will have a long period of chronic illness at the end of our lives.
During that period, we'll likely spend a lot of time in hospitals and hospices and care homes.
on what a day in my life can look like.
You know those fluorescent lights and the endless corridors and those rows of uncomfortable chairs.
Hospital architecture has earned its bad reputation.
But the surprising thing is, it wasn't always like this.
This is L'Ospedale degli Innocenti, built in 1419 by Brunelleschi, who was one of the most famous and influential architects of his time.
And when I look at this building and then think about hospitals today, what amazes me is this building's ambition.
It's just a really great building.
It has these courtyards in the middle so that all of the rooms have daylight and fresh air, and the rooms are big and they have high ceilings, so they just feel more comfortable to be in.
And it's also beautiful.
Somehow, we've forgotten that that's even possible for a hospital.
Now, if we want better buildings for dying, then we have to talk about it, but because we find the subject of death uncomfortable, we don't talk about it, and we don't question how we as a society approach death.
One of the things that surprised me most in my research, though, is how changeable attitudes actually are.
This is the first crematorium in the U.K., which was built in Woking in the 1870s.
And when this was first built, there were protests in the local village.
And yet, only a hundred years later, three quarters of us get cremated.
People are actually really open to changing things if they're given the chance to talk about them.
So this conversation about death and architecture was what I wanted to start when I did my first exhibition on it in Venice in June, which was called "Death in Venice." It was designed to be quite playful so that people would literally engage with it.
This is one of our exhibits, which is an interactive map of London that shows just how much of the real estate in the city is given over to death and dying, and as you wave your hand across the map, the name of that piece of real estate, the building or cemetery, is revealed.
Another of our exhibits was a series of postcards that people could take away with them.
And they showed people's homes and hospitals and cemeteries and mortuaries, and they tell the story of the different spaces that we pass through on either side of death.
and the United States, is a key part of how we die.
Now, the strangest thing was the way that visitors reacted to the exhibition, especially the audio-visual works.
We had people dancing and running and jumping as they tried to activate the exhibits in different ways, and at a certain point they would kind of stop and remember that they were in an exhibition about death, and that maybe that's not how you're supposed to act.
But actually, I would question whether there is one way that you're supposed to act around death, and if there's not, I'd ask you to think about what you think a good death is, and what you think that architecture that supports a good death might be like, and mightn't it be a little less like this and a little more like this? Thank you.
(Applause) These dragons from deep time are incredible creatures.
the publishers were really confused.
Was it about me as a child refugee, or as a woman who set up a high-tech software company back in the 1960s, Now the students and I and eventually employed over 8,500 people? Or was it as a mother of an autistic child? Or as a philanthropist that's now given away serious money? Well, it turns out, I'm all of these.
So let me tell you my story.
All that I am stems from when I got onto a train in Vienna, part of the Kindertransport that saved nearly 10,000 Jewish children from Nazi Europe.
I was five years old, clutching the hand of my nine-year-old sister and had very little idea as to what was going on.
"What is England and why am I going there?" I'm only alive because so long ago, I was helped by generous strangers.
I was lucky, and doubly lucky to be later reunited with my birth parents.
But, sadly, I never bonded with them again.
But I've done more in the seven decades since that miserable day when my mother put me on the train than I would ever have dreamed possible.
And I love England, my adopted country, with a passion that perhaps only someone who has lost their human rights can feel.
I decided to make mine a life that was worth saving.
And then, I just got on with it.
(Laughter) Let me take you back to the early 1960s.
To get past the gender issues of the time, I set up my own software house at one of the first such startups in Britain.
But it was also a company of women, a company for women, an early social business.
And people laughed at the very idea because software, at that time, was given away free with hardware.
Nobody would buy software, certainly not from a woman.
Although women were then coming out of the universities with decent degrees, there was a glass ceiling to our progress.
And I'd hit that glass ceiling too often, and I wanted opportunities for women.
I recruited professionally qualified women who'd left the industry on marriage, or when their first child was expected and structured them into a home-working organization.
We pioneered the concept of women going back into the workforce after a career break.
We pioneered all sorts of new, flexible work methods: job shares, profit-sharing, and eventually, co-ownership when I took a quarter of the company into the hands of the staff at no cost to anyone but me.
For years, I was the first woman this, or the only woman that.
And in those days, I couldn't work on the stock exchange, I couldn't drive a bus or fly an airplane.
Indeed, I couldn't open a bank account without my husband's permission.
My generation of women fought the battles for the right to work and the right for equal pay.
Nobody really expected much from people at work or in society because all the expectations then were about home and family responsibilities.
And I couldn't really face that, so I started to challenge the conventions of the time, in my business development letters, so as to get through the door before anyone realized that he was a she.
(Laughter) My company, called Freelance Programmers, and that's precisely what it was, couldn't have started smaller: on the dining room table, and financed by the equivalent of 100 dollars in today's terms, and financed by my labor and by borrowing against the house.
My interests were scientific, the market was commercial -- things such as payroll, which I found rather boring.
So I had to compromise with operational research work, which had the intellectual challenge that interested me and the commercial value that was valued by the clients: things like scheduling freight trains, time-tabling buses, stock control, lots and lots of stock control.
And eventually, the work came in.
We disguised the domestic and part-time nature of the staff by offering fixed prices, one of the very first to do so.
And who would have guessed that the programming of the black box flight recorder of Supersonic Concord would have been done by a bunch of women working in their own homes.
(Applause) All we used was a simple "trust the staff" approach and a simple telephone.
We even used to ask job applicants, "Do you have access to a telephone?" An early project was to develop software standards on management control protocols.
And software was and still is a maddeningly hard-to-control activity, so that was enormously valuable.
We used the standards ourselves, we were even paid to update them over the years, and eventually, they were adopted by NATO.
Our programmers -- remember, only women, including gay and transgender -- worked with pencil and paper to develop flowcharts defining each task to be done.
And they then wrote code, usually machine code, sometimes binary code, which was then sent by mail to a data center to be punched onto paper tape or card and then re-punched, in order to verify it.
All this, before it ever got near a computer.
That was programming in the early 1960s.
In 1975, 13 years from startup, equal opportunity legislation came in in Britain and that made it illegal to have our pro-female policies.
And as an example of unintended consequences, my female company had to let the men in.
(Laughter) When I started my company of women, the men said, "How interesting, because it only works because it's small." And later, as it became sizable, they accepted, "Yes, it is sizable now, but of no strategic interest." And later, when it was a company valued at over three billion dollars, and I'd made 70 of the staff into millionaires, they sort of said, "Well done, Steve!" (Laughter) (Applause) You can always tell ambitious women by the shape of our heads: They're flat on top for being patted patronizingly.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we have larger feet to stand away from the kitchen sink.
(Laughter) Let me share with you two secrets of success: Surround yourself with first-class people and people that you like; and choose your partner very, very carefully.
Because the other day when I said, "My husband's an angel," a woman complained -- "You're lucky," she said, "mine's still alive." (Laughter) If success were easy, we'd all be millionaires.
But in my case, it came in the midst of family trauma and indeed, crisis.
Our late son, Giles, was an only child, a beautiful, contented baby.
And then, at two and a half, like a changeling in a fairy story, he lost the little speech that he had and turned into a wild, unmanageable toddler.
Not the terrible twos; he was profoundly autistic and he never spoke again.
Giles was the first resident in the first house of the first charity that I set up to pioneer services for autism.
And then there's been a groundbreaking Prior's Court school for pupils with autism and a medical research charity, again, all for autism.
Because whenever I found a gap in services, I tried to help.
I like doing new things and making new things happen.
And I've just started a three-year think tank for autism.
And so that some of my wealth does go back to the industry from which it stems, I've also founded the Oxford Internet Institute and other IT ventures.
The Oxford Internet Institute focuses not on the technology, but on the social, economic, legal and ethical issues of the Internet.
Giles died unexpectedly 17 years ago now.
And I have learned to live without him, and I have learned to live without his need of me.
Philanthropy is all that I do now.
I need never worry about getting lost because several charities would quickly come and find me.
(Laughter) It's one thing to have an idea for an enterprise, but as many people in this room will know, making it happen is a very difficult thing and it demands extraordinary energy, self-belief and determination, the courage to risk family and home, and a 24/7 commitment that borders on the obsessive.
So it's just as well that I'm a workaholic.
I believe in the beauty of work when we do it properly and in humility.
Work is not just something I do when I'd rather be doing something else.
We live our lives forward.
So what has all that taught me? I learned that tomorrow's never going to be like today, and certainly nothing like yesterday.
And that made me able to cope with change, indeed, eventually to welcome change, though I'm told I'm still very difficult.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) "Where are you from?" said the pale, tattooed man.
"Where are you from?" It's September 21, 2001, 10 days after the worst attack on America since World War II.
Everyone wonders about the next plane.
People are looking for scapegoats.
The president, the night before, pledges to "bring our enemies to justice or bring justice to our enemies." And in the Dallas mini-mart, a Dallas mini-part surrounded by tire shops and strip joints a Bangladeshi immigrant works the register.
Back home, Raisuddin Bhuiyan was a big man, an Air Force officer.
But he dreamed of a fresh start in America.
If he had to work briefly in a mini-mart to save up for I.T. classes and his wedding in two months, so be it.
Then, on September 21, that tattooed man enters the mart.
He holds a shotgun.
Raisuddin knows the drill: puts cash on the counter.
This time, the man doesn't touch the money.
"Where are you from?" he asks.
"Excuse me?" Raisuddin answers.
His accent betrays him.
The tattooed man, a self-styled true American vigilante, shoots Raisuddin in revenge for 9/11.
Raisuddin feels millions of bees stinging his face.
In fact, dozens of scalding, birdshot pellets puncture his head.
Behind the counter, he lays in blood.
He cups a hand over his forehead to keep in the brains on which he'd gambled everything.
He recites verses from the Koran, begging his God to live.
He senses he is dying.
He didn't die.
His right eye left him.
His fiance left him.
His landlord, the mini-mart owner, kicked him out.
Soon he was homeless and 60,000 dollars in medical debt, including a fee for dialing for an ambulance.
But Raisuddin lived.
And years later, he would ask what he could do to repay his God and become worthy of this second chance.
He would come to believe, in fact, that this chance called for him to give a second chance to a man we might think deserved no chance at all.
Twelve years ago, I was a fresh graduate seeking my way in the world.
Born in Ohio to Indian immigrants, I settled on the ultimate rebellion against my parents, moving to the country they had worked so damn hard to get out of.
What I thought might be a six-month stint in Mumbai stretched to six years.
I became a writer and found myself amid a magical story: the awakening of hope across much of the so-called Third World.
Six years ago, I returned to America and realized something: The American Dream was thriving, but only in India.
In America, not so much.
In fact, I observed that America was fracturing into two distinct societies: a republic of dreams and a republic of fears.
And then, I stumbled onto this incredible tale of two lives and of these two Americas that brutally collided in that Dallas mini-mart.
I knew at once I wanted to learn more, and eventually that I would write a book about them, for their story was the story of America's fracturing and of how it might be put back together.
After he was shot, Raisuddin's life grew no easier.
The day after admitting him, the hospital discharged him.
His right eye couldn't see.
He couldn't speak.
Metal peppered his face.
But he had no insurance, so they bounced him.
His family in Bangladesh begged him, "Come home." But he told them he had a dream to see about.
He found telemarketing work, then he became an Olive Garden waiter, because where better to get over his fear of white people than the Olive Garden? (Laughter) Now, as a devout Muslim, he refused alcohol, didn't touch the stuff.
Then he learned that not selling it would slash his pay.
So he reasoned, like a budding American pragmatist, "Well, God wouldn't want me to starve, would he?" And before long, in some months, Raisuddin was that Olive Garden's highest grossing alcohol pusher.
He found a man who taught him database administration.
He got part-time I.T. gigs.
Eventually, he landed a six-figure job at a blue chip tech company in Dallas.
But as America began to work for Raisuddin, he avoided the classic error of the fortunate: assuming you're the rule, not the exception.
In fact, he observed that many with the fortune of being born American were nonetheless trapped in lives that made second chances like his impossible.
He saw it at the Olive Garden itself, where so many of his colleagues had childhood horror stories of family dysfunction, chaos, addiction, crime.
He'd heard a similar tale about the man who shot him back when he attended his trial.
The closer Raisuddin got to the America he had coveted from afar, the more he realized there was another, equally real, America that was stingier with second chances.
The man who shot Raisuddin grew up in that stingier America.
From a distance, Mark Stroman was always the spark of parties, always making girls feel pretty.
Always working, no matter what drugs or fights he'd had the night before.
But he'd always wrestled with demons.
He entered the world through the three gateways that doom so many young American men: bad parents, bad schools, bad prisons.
His mother told him, regretfully, as a boy that she'd been just 50 dollars short of aborting him.
Sometimes, that little boy would be at school, he'd suddenly pull a knife on his fellow classmates.
Sometimes that same little boy would be at his grandparents', tenderly feeding horses.
He was getting arrested before he shaved, first juvenile, then prison.
He became a casual white supremacist and, like so many around him, a drug-addled and absent father.
And then, before long, he found himself on death row, for in his 2001 counter-jihad, he had shot not one mini-mart clerk, but three.
Only Raisuddin survived.
that left Stroman better.
His old influences quit him.
The people entering his life were virtuous and caring: pastors, journalists, European pen-pals.
They listened to him, prayed with him, helped him question himself.
And sent him on a journey of introspection and betterment.
Do they actually help people and regretted his swastika tattoos.
He found God.
Then one day in 2011, 10 years after his crimes, on a Friday night and on a Saturday night One of the men he'd shot, the survivor, was fighting to save his life.
You see, late in 2009, eight years after that shooting, Raisuddin had gone on his own journey, a pilgrimage to Mecca.
Amid its crowds, he felt immense gratitude, but also duty.
He recalled promising God, as he lay dying in 2001, that if he lived, he would serve humanity all his days.
Then, he'd gotten busy relaying the bricks of a life.
Now it was time to pay his debts.
And he decided, upon reflection, that his method of payment would be an intervention in the cycle of vengeance between the Muslim and Western worlds.
And how would he intervene? By forgiving Stroman publicly in the name of Islam and its doctrine of mercy.
And then suing the state of Texas and its governor Rick Perry to prevent them from executing Stroman, exactly like most people shot in the face do.
(Laughter) Yet Raisuddin's mercy was inspired not only by faith.
A newly minted American citizen, he had come to believe that Stroman was the product of a hurting America that couldn't just be lethally injected away.
That insight is what moved me to write my book "The True American." This immigrant begging America to be as merciful to a native son as it had been to an adopted one.
In the mini-mart, all those years earlier, not just two men, but two Americas collided.
An America that still dreams, still strives, still imagines that tomorrow can build on today, and an America that has resigned to fate, buckled under stress and chaos, lowered expectations, an ducked into the oldest of refuges: the tribal fellowship of one's own narrow kind.
And it was Raisuddin, despite being a newcomer, despite being attacked, despite being homeless and traumatized, who belonged to that republic of dreams and Stroman who belonged to that other wounded country, despite being born with the privilege of a native white man.
I realized these men's stories formed an urgent parable about America.
The country I am so proud to call my own wasn't living through a generalized decline as seen in Spain or Greece, where prospects were dimming for everyone.
America is simultaneously the most and the least successful country in the industrialized world.
Launching the world's best companies, even as record numbers of children go hungry.
Seeing life-expectancy drop for large groups, even as it polishes the world's best hospitals.
America today is a sprightly young body, hit by one of those strokes that sucks the life from one side, while leaving the other worryingly perfect.
On July 20, 2011, right after a sobbing Raisuddin testified in defense of Stroman's life, Stroman was killed by lethal injection by the state he so loved.
Hours earlier, when Raisuddin still thought he could still save Stroman, the two men got to speak for the second time ever.
Here is an excerpt from their phone call.
Raisuddin: "Mark, you should know that I am praying for God, the most compassionate and gracious.
I forgive you and I do not hate you.
I never hated you." Stroman: "You are a remarkable person.
Thank you from my heart.
I love you, bro." Even more amazingly, after the execution, Raisuddin reached out to Stroman's eldest daughter, Amber, an ex-convinct and an addict.
and offered his help.
"You may have lost a father," he told her, "but you've gained an uncle." He wanted her, too, to have a second chance.
If human history were a parade, America's float would be a neon shrine to second chances.
But America, generous with second chances to the children of other lands, today grows miserly with first chances to the children of its own.
America still dazzles at allowing anybody to become an American.
But it is losing its luster at allowing every American to become a somebody.
Over the last decade, seven million foreigners gained American citizenship.
Remarkable.
In the meanwhile, how many Americans gained a place in the middle class? Actually, the net influx was negative.
Go back further, and it's even more striking: Since the 60s, the middle class has shrunk by 20 percent, mainly because of the people tumbling out of it.
And my reporting around the country tells me the problem is grimmer than simple inequality.
What I observe is a pair of secessions from the unifying center of American life.
An affluent secession of up, up and away, into elite enclaves of the educated and into a global matrix of work, money and connections, and an impoverished secession of down and out into disconnected, dead-end lives that the fortunate scarcely see.
And don't console yourself that you are the 99 percent.
If you live near a Whole Foods, and they keep getting thrown to the ground.
if you're paid by the year, not the hour, if most people you know finished college, if no one you know uses meth, if you married once and remain married, if you're not one of 65 million Americans with a criminal record -- if any or all of these things describe you, then accept the possibility that actually, you may not know what's going on and you may be part of the problem.
Other generations had to build a fresh society after slavery, pull through a depression, defeat fascism, freedom-ride in Mississippi.
The moral challenge of my generation, I believe, is to reacquaint these two Americas, to choose union over secession once again.
This ins't a problem we can tax or tax-cut away.
It won't be solved by tweeting harder, building slicker apps, or starting one more artisanal coffee roasting service.
to take on the wilting America as our own, as Raisuddin tried to do.
Like him, we can make pilgrimages.
And there, in Baltimore and Oregon and Appalachia, find new purpose, as he did.
We can immerse ourselves in that other country, bear witness to its hopes and sorrows, and, like Raisuddin, ask what we can do.
What can you do? What can you do? What can we do? How might we build a more merciful country? We, the greatest inventors in the world, can invent solutions to the problems of that America, not only our own.
We, the writers and the journalists, can cover that America's stories, instead of shutting down bureaus in its midst.
We can finance that America's ideas, instead of ideas from New York and San Francisco.
We can put our stethoscopes to its backs, teach there, go to court there, make there, live there, pray there.
This, I believe, is the calling of a generation.
An America whose two halves learn again to stride, to plow, to forge, to dare together.
A republic of chances, rewoven, renewed, begins with us.
Thank you.
(Applause) You're looking at a woman who was publicly silent for a decade.
Obviously, that's changed, but only recently.
It was several months ago I've spent about 15 years making them.
at the Forbes 30 Under 30 summit: 1,500 brilliant people, all under the age of 30.
That meant that in 1998, the oldest among the group were only 14, and the youngest, just four.
I joked with them that some might only have heard of me from rap songs.
Yes, I'm in rap songs.
Almost 40 rap songs. (Laughter) But the night of my speech, a surprising thing happened.
At the age of 41, I was hit on by a 27-year-old guy.
I know, right? He was charming and I was flattered, and I declined.
You know what his unsuccessful pickup line was? He could make me feel 22 again.
(Laughter) (Applause) I realized later that night, I'm probably the only person over 40 who does not want to be 22 again.
(Laughter) Unless you have a hammer, At the age of 22, I fell in love with my boss, and at the age of 24, I learned the devastating consequences.
Can I see a show of hands of anyone here who didn't make a mistake or do something they regretted at 22? Yep. That's what I thought.
So like me, at 22, a few of you may have also taken wrong turns and fallen in love with the wrong person, maybe even your boss.
Unlike me, though, your boss probably wasn't the president of the United States of America.
Of course, life is full of surprises.
Not a day goes by that I'm not reminded of my mistake, and I regret that mistake deeply.
In 1998, after having been swept up into an improbable romance, I was then swept up into the eye of a political, legal and media maelstrom like we had never seen before.
Remember, just a few years earlier, news was consumed from just three places: reading a newspaper or magazine, listening to the radio, or watching television.
That was it.
But that wasn't my fate.
Instead, this scandal was brought to you by the digital revolution.
That meant we could access all the information we wanted, when we wanted it, anytime, anywhere, and when the story broke in January 1998, it broke online.
It was the first time the traditional news was usurped by the Internet for a major news story, a click that reverberated around the world.
What that meant for me personally was that overnight I went from being a completely private figure to a publicly humiliated one worldwide.
I was patient zero of losing a personal reputation on a global scale almost instantaneously.
This rush to judgment, enabled by technology, led to mobs of virtual stone-throwers.
Granted, it was before social media, but people could still comment online, email stories, and, of course, email cruel jokes.
News sources plastered photos of me all over to sell newspapers, banner ads online, and to keep people tuned to the TV.
Do you recall a particular image of me, say, wearing a beret? Now, I admit I made mistakes, especially wearing that beret.
But the attention and judgment that I received, not the story, but that I personally received, was unprecedented.
I was branded as a tramp, tart, slut, whore, bimbo, and, of course, that woman.
I was seen by many but actually known by few.
And I get it: it was easy to forget that that woman was dimensional, had a soul, and was once unbroken.
When this happened to me 17 years ago, there was no name for it.
Now we call it cyberbullying and online harassment.
search people, run people's names, talk about how that experience has helped shape my cultural observations, and how I hope my past experience can lead to a change that results in less suffering for others.
In 1998, I lost my reputation and my dignity.
I lost almost everything, and I almost lost my life.
Let me paint a picture for you.
It is September of 1998.
I'm sitting in a windowless office room inside the Office of the Independent Counsel underneath humming fluorescent lights.
I'm listening to the sound of my voice, my voice on surreptitiously taped phone calls that a supposed friend had made the year before.
I'm here because I've been legally required to personally authenticate all 20 hours of taped conversation.
For the past eight months, the mysterious content of these tapes has hung like the Sword of Damocles over my head.
I mean, who can remember what they said a year ago? Scared and mortified, I listen, listen as I prattle on about the flotsam and jetsam of the day; listen as I confess my love for the president, and, of course, my heartbreak; listen to my sometimes catty, sometimes churlish, sometimes silly self being cruel, unforgiving, uncouth; listen, deeply, deeply ashamed, to the worst version of myself, a self I don't even recognize.
A few days later, the Starr Report is released to Congress, and all of those tapes and transcripts, those stolen words, form a part of it.
That people can read the transcripts is horrific enough, but a few weeks later, the audio tapes are aired on TV, and significant portions made available online.
The public humiliation was excruciating.
Life was almost unbearable.
This was not something that happened with regularity back then in 1998, and by this, I mean the stealing of people's private words, actions, conversations or photos, This was the first picture I took. It was kind of amazing.
public without consent, public without context, and public without compassion.
Fast forward 12 years to 2010, and now social media has been born.
The landscape has sadly become much more populated with instances like mine, whether or not someone actually make a mistake, and now it's for both public and private people.
The consequences for some have become dire, very dire.
I was on the phone with my mom in September of 2010, and we were talking about the news of a young college freshman from Rutgers University named Tyler Clementi.
Sweet, sensitive, creative Tyler was secretly webcammed by his roommate while being intimate with another man.
When the online world learned of this incident, the ridicule and cyberbullying ignited.
A few days later, Tyler jumped from the George Washington Bridge to his death.
He was 18.
My mom was beside herself about what happened to Tyler and his family, and she was gutted with pain in a way that I just couldn't quite understand, and then eventually I realized she was reliving 1998, reliving a time when she sat by my bed every night, reliving a time when she made me shower with the bathroom door open, and reliving a time when both of my parents feared that I would be humiliated to death, literally.
Today, too many parents haven't had the chance to step in and rescue their loved ones.
Too many have learned of their child's suffering and humiliation after it was too late.
Tyler's tragic, senseless death was a turning point for me.
It served to recontextualize my experiences, and I then began to look at the world of humiliation and bullying around me and see something different.
In 1998, we had no way of knowing where this brave new technology called the Internet would take us.
Since then, it has connected people in unimaginable ways, joining lost siblings, saving lives, launching revolutions, but the darkness, cyberbullying, and slut-shaming that I experienced had mushroomed.
Every day online, people, especially young people who are not developmentally equipped to handle this, are so abused and humiliated that they can't imagine living to the next day, and some, tragically, don't, and there's nothing virtual about that.
ChildLine, a U.K. nonprofit that's focused on helping young people on various issues, released a staggering statistic late last year: From 2012 to 2013, there was an 87 percent increase in calls and emails related to cyberbullying.
A meta-analysis done out of the Netherlands showed that for the first time, cyberbullying was leading to suicidal ideations more significantly than offline bullying.
And you know what shocked me, although it shouldn't have, was other research last year that determined humiliation was a more intensely felt emotion than either happiness or even anger.
Cruelty to others is nothing new, but online, technologically enhanced shaming is amplified, uncontained, and permanently accessible.
The echo of embarrassment used to extend only as far as your family, village, school or community, but now it's the online community too.
Millions of people, often anonymously, can stab you with their words, and that's a lot of pain, and there are no perimeters around how many people can publicly observe you and put you in a public stockade.
There is a very personal price to public humiliation, and the growth of the Internet has jacked up that price.
For nearly two decades now, we have slowly been sowing the seeds of shame and public humiliation in our cultural soil, both on- and offline.
Gossip websites, paparazzi, reality programming, politics, news outlets and sometimes hackers all traffic in shame.
It's led to desensitization and a permissive environment online which lends itself to trolling, invasion of privacy, and cyberbullying.
This shift has created what Professor Nicolaus Mills calls a culture of humiliation.
Consider a few prominent examples just from the past six months alone.
Snapchat, the service which is used mainly by younger generations and claims that its messages only have the lifespan of a few seconds.
You can imagine the range of content that that gets.
A third-party app which Snapchatters use to preserve the lifespan of the messages was hacked, and 100,000 personal conversations, photos, and videos were leaked online to now have a lifespan of forever.
Jennifer Lawrence and several other actors had their iCloud accounts hacked, and private, intimate, nude photos were plastered across the Internet without their permission.
One gossip website had over five million hits for this one story.
And what about the Sony Pictures cyberhacking? The documents which received the most attention were private emails that had maximum public embarrassment value.
But in this culture of humiliation, there is another kind of price tag attached to public shaming.
The price does not measure the cost to the victim, which Tyler and too many others, notably women, minorities, and members of the LGBTQ community have paid, but the price measures the profit of those who prey on them.
This invasion of others is a raw material, efficiently and ruthlessly mined, packaged and sold at a profit.
A marketplace has emerged where public humiliation is a commodity and shame is an industry.
How is the money made? Clicks.
The more shame, the more clicks.
The more clicks, the more advertising dollars.
We're in a dangerous cycle.
The more we click on this kind of gossip, Theaster, thank you so much for being here with us today.
and the more numb we get, the more we click.
All the while, someone is making money off of the back of someone else's suffering.
With every click, we make a choice.
The more we saturate our culture with public shaming, the more accepted it is, the more we will see behavior like cyberbullying, trolling, some forms of hacking, and online harassment.
Why? Because they all have humiliation at their cores.
This behavior is a symptom of the culture we've created.
Changing behavior begins with evolving beliefs.
We've seen that to be true with racism, homophobia, and plenty of other biases, today and in the past.
As we've changed beliefs about same-sex marriage, more people have been offered equal freedoms.
When we began valuing sustainability, more people began to recycle.
So as far as our culture of humiliation goes, what we need is a cultural revolution.
Public shaming as a blood sport has to stop, and it's time for an intervention on the Internet and in our culture.
The shift begins with something simple, but it's not easy.
We need to return to a long-held value of compassion -- compassion and empathy.
Online, we've got a compassion deficit, an empathy crisis.
Researcher Bren Brown said, and I quote, "Shame can't survive empathy." Shame cannot survive empathy.
I've seen some very dark days in my life, and it was the compassion and empathy from my family, friends, professionals, and sometimes even strangers that saved me.
Even empathy from one person can make a difference.
The theory of minority influence, proposed by social psychologist Serge Moscovici, says that even in small numbers, when there's consistency over time, change can happen.
In the online world, we can foster minority influence by becoming upstanders.
To become an upstander means instead of bystander apathy, we can post a positive comment for someone or report a bullying situation.
Trust me, compassionate comments help abate the negativity.
We can also counteract the culture by supporting organizations that deal with these kinds of issues, like the Tyler Clementi Foundation in the U.S., In the U.K., there's Anti-Bullying Pro, and in Australia, there's Project Rockit.
We talk a lot about our right to freedom of expression, but we need to talk more about our responsibility to freedom of expression.
We all want to be heard, but let's acknowledge the difference between speaking up with intention and speaking up for attention.
The Internet is the superhighway for the id, but online, showing empathy to others benefits us all and helps create a safer and better world.
We need to communicate online with compassion, consume news with compassion, and click with compassion.
Just imagine walking a mile in someone else's headline.
I'd like to end on a personal note.
In the past nine months, the question I've been asked the most is why.
Why now? Why was I sticking my head above the parapet? You can read between the lines in those questions, and the answer has nothing to do with politics.
The top note answer was and is because it's time: time to stop tip-toeing around my past; time to stop living a life of opprobrium; and time to take back my narrative.
It's also not just about saving myself.
Anyone who is suffering from shame and public humiliation needs to know one thing: You can survive it.
I know it's hard.
It may not be painless, quick or easy, but you can insist on a different ending to your story.
Have compassion for yourself.
We all deserve compassion, and to live both online and off in a more compassionate world.
Thank you for listening.
(Applause) I cannot forget them.
Their names were Aslan, Alik, Andrei, Fernanda, Fred, Galina, Gunnhild, Hans, Ingeborg, Matti, Natalya, Nancy, Sheryl, Usman, Zarema, and the list is longer.
For many, their existence, their humanity, coldly recorded as "security incidents." For me, they were colleagues belonging to that community of humanitarian aid workers that tried to bring a bit of comfort to the victims of the wars in Chechnya in the '90s.
They were nurses, logisticians, shelter experts, paralegals, interpreters.
And for this service, they were murdered, their families torn apart, and their story largely forgotten.
No one was ever sentenced for these crimes.
I cannot forget them.
They live in me somehow, their memories giving me meaning every day.
But they are also haunting the dark street of my mind.
As humanitarian aid workers, they made the choice to be at the side of the victim, to provide some assistance, some comfort, some protection, but when they needed protection themselves, it wasn't there.
When you see the headlines of your newspaper these days with the war in Iraq or in Syria -- aid worker abducted, hostage executed -- but who were they? Why were they there? What motivated them? How did we become so indifferent to these crimes? This is why I am here today with you.
We need to find better ways to remember them.
We also need to explain the key values to which they dedicated their lives.
We also need to demand justice.
When in '96 I was sent by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the North Caucasus, I knew some of the risks.
Five colleagues had been killed, three had been seriously injured, seven had already been taken hostage.
So we were careful.
We were using armored vehicles, decoy cars, changing patterns of travel, changing homes, all sorts of security measures.
Yet on a cold winter night of January '98, it was my turn.
When I entered my flat in Vladikavkaz with a guard, we were surrounded by armed men.
They took the guard, they put him on the floor, they beat him up in front of me, tied him, dragged him away.
I was handcuffed, blindfolded, and forced to kneel, as the silencer of a gun pressed against my neck.
When it happens to you, there is no time for thinking, no time for praying.
My brain went on automatic, rewinding quickly the life I'd just left behind.
It took me long minutes to figure out that those masked men there were not there to kill me, but that someone, somewhere, had ordered my kidnapping.
Then a process of dehumanization started that day.
I was no more than just a commodity.
I normally don't talk about this, but I'd like to share a bit with you some of those 317 days of captivity.
I was kept in an underground cellar, total darkness, for 23 hours and 45 minutes every day, and then the guards would come, normally two.
They would bring a big piece of bread, a bowl of soup, and a candle.
That candle would burn for 15 minutes, 15 minutes of precious light, and then they would take it away, and I returned to darkness.
I was chained by a metal cable to my bed.
I could do only four small steps.
I always dreamt of the fifth one.
And no TV, no radio, no newspaper, no one to talk to.
I had no towel, no soap, no toilet paper, just two metal buckets open, one for water, for one waste.
Can you imagine that mock execution can be a pastime for guards when they are sadistic or when they are just bored or drunk? We are breaking my nerves very slowly.
Isolation and darkness are particularly difficult to describe.
How do you describe nothing? When marriage was an economic enterprise, in that very thin border between sanity and madness.
In the darkness, sometimes I played imaginary games of checkers.
I would start with the black, play with the white, back to the black trying to trick the other side.
can start to add up to something pretty significant.
I was tormented by the thoughts of my family and my colleague, the guard, Edik.
I didn't know what had happened to him.
I was trying not to think, I tried to fill up my time by doing all sorts of physical exercise on the spot.
I tried to pray, I tried all sorts of memorization games.
But darkness also creates images and thoughts that are not normal.
One part of your brain wants you to resist, to shout, to cry, and the other part of the brain orders you to shut up and just go through it.
It's a constant internal debate; there is no one to arbitrate.
Once a guard came to me, very aggressively, and he told me, "Today you're going to kneel and beg for your food." I wasn't in a good mood, so I insulted him.
I insulted his mother, I insulted his ancestors.
The consequence was moderate: he threw the food into my waste.
The day after he came back with the same demand.
He got the same answer, taken by the shuttle Atlantis as it was departing Ooh ooh ooh, I didn't know hunger hurt so much when you have so little.
So when the guards came down, I knelt.
I begged for my food.
Submission was the only way for me to make it to another candle.
After my kidnapping, I was transferred from North Ossetia to Chechnya, three days of slow travel in the trunks of different cars, and upon arrival, I was interrogated for 11 days by a guy called Ruslan.
The routine was always the same: a bit more light, 45 minutes.
He would come down to the cellar, he would ask the guards to tie me on the chair, And then he would yell questions.
He would scream. He would beat me.
I'll spare you the details.
There are many questions I could not understand, and there are some questions I did not want to understand.
The length of the interrogation was the duration of the tape: 15 songs, 45 minutes.
I would always long for the last song.
On one day, one night in that cellar, I don't know what it was, I heard a child crying above my head, a boy, maybe two or three years old.
Footsteps, confusion, people running.
So when Ruslan came the day after, before he put the first question to me, I asked him, "How is your son today? Is he feeling better?" Ruslan was taken by surprise.
He was furious that the guards may have leaked some details about his private life.
I kept talking about NGOs supplying medicines to local clinics that may help his son to get better.
And we talked about education, we talked about families.
He talked to me about his children.
I talked to him about my daughters.
And then he'd talk about guns, about cars, about women, and I had to talk about guns, about cars, about women.
And we talked until the last song on the tape.
Ruslan was the most brutal man I ever met.
He did not touch me anymore.
He did not ask any other questions.
I was no longer just a commodity.
Two days after, I was transferred to another place.
There, a guard came to me, very close -- it was quite unusual -- and he said with a very soft voice, he said, "I'd like to thank you for the assistance your organization provided my family when we were displaced in nearby Dagestan." What could I possibly reply? It was so painful. It was like a blade in the belly.
It took me weeks of internal thinking to try to reconcile the good reasons we had to assist that family and the soldier of fortune he became.
He was young, he was shy.
I never saw his face.
He probably meant well.
But in those 15 seconds, he made me question everything we did, all the sacrifices.
He made me think also how they see us.
Until then, I had assumed that they know why we are there and what we are doing.
One cannot assume this.
Well, explaining why we do this is not that easy, even to our closest relatives.
We are not perfect, we are not superior, we are not the world's fire brigade, we are not superheroes, we don't stop wars, we know that humanitarian response is not a substitute for political solution.
Yet we do this because one life matters.
Sometimes that's the only difference you make -- one individual, one family, a small group of individuals -- and it matters.
When you have a tsunami, an earthquake or a typhoon, you see teams of rescuers coming from all over the world, searching for survivors for weeks.
Why? Nobody questions this.
Every life matters, or every life should matter.
This is the same for us when we help refugees, people displaced within their country by conflict, or stateless persons, I know many people, when they are confronted by overwhelming suffering, they feel powerless and they stop there.
It's a pity, because there are so many ways people can help.
We don't stop with that feeling.
We try to do whatever we can to provide some assistance, some protection, some comfort.
We have to.
We can't do otherwise.
It's what makes us feel, I don't know, simply human.
That's a picture of me the day of my release.
Months after my release, I met the then-French prime minister.
The second thing he told me: "You were totally irresponsible to go to the North Caucasus.
You don't know how many problems you've created for us." It was a short meeting.
(Laughter) I think helping people in danger is responsible.
In that war, that nobody seriously wanted to stop, and we have many of these today, bringing some assistance to people in need and a bit of protection was not just an act of humanity, it was making a real difference for the people.
Why could he not understand this? We have a responsibility to try.
You've heard about that concept: Responsibility to Protect.
Outcomes may depend on various parameters.
We may even fail, but there is worse than failing -- it's not even trying when we can.
Well, if you are met this way, if you sign up for this sort of job, your life is going to be full of joy and sadness, because there are a lot of people we cannot help, a lot of people we cannot protect, a lot of people we did not save.
I call them my ghost, and by having witnessed their suffering from close, you take a bit of that suffering on yourself.
Many young humanitarian workers go through their first experience with a lot of bitterness.
They are thrown into situations where they are witness, but they are powerless to bring any change.
They have to learn to accept it and gradually turn this into positive energy.
It's difficult.
Many don't succeed, but for those who do, there is no other job like this.
You can see the difference you make every day.
Humanitarian aid workers know the risk they are taking yet our life, our job, is becoming increasingly life-threatening, and the sanctity of our life is fading.
Do you know that since the millennium, the number of attacks on humanitarian aid workers has tripled? 2013 broke new records: 155 colleagues killed, 171 seriously wounded, 134 abducted.
So many broken lives.
Until the beginning of the civil war in Somalia in the late '80s, humanitarian aid workers were sometimes victims of what we call collateral damages, but by and large we were not the target of these attacks.
This has changed.
Look at this picture.
Baghdad, August 2003: 24 colleagues were killed.
Gone are the days when a U.N. blue flag or a Red Cross Criminal groups and some political groups have cross-fertilized over the last 20 years, and they've created these sort of hybrids with whom we have no way of communicating.
Humanitarian principles are tested, questioned, and often ignored, but perhaps more importantly, we have abandoned the search for justice.
There seems to be no consequence whatsoever for attacks against humanitarian aid workers.
After my release, I was told not to seek any form of justice.
It won't do you any good, that's what I was told.
Plus, you're going to put in danger the life of other colleagues.
It took me years to see the sentencing of three people associated with my kidnapping, but this was the exception.
There was no justice for any of the humanitarian aid workers killed or abducted in Chechnya between '95 and '99, and it's the same all over the world.
This is unacceptable.
This is inexcusable.
Attacks on humanitarian aid workers are war crimes in international law.
Those crimes should not go unpunished.
We must end this cycle of impunity.
We must consider that those attacks against humanitarian aid workers That makes me furious.
I know I'm very lucky compared to the refugees I work for.
I don't know what it is to have seen my whole town destroyed.
I don't know what it is to have seen my relatives shot in front of me.
I don't know what it is to lose the protection of my country.
I also know that I'm very lucky compared to other hostages.
Four days before my eventful release, four hostages were beheaded a few miles away from where I was kept in captivity.
Why them? Why am I here today? No easy answer.
I was received with a lot of support that I got from my relatives, from colleagues, from friends, from people I didn't know.
They have helped me over the years to come out of the darkness.
Not everyone was treated with the same attention.
How many of my colleagues, after a traumatic incident, I can count nine that I knew personally.
How many of my colleagues went through a difficult divorce after a traumatic experience because they could not explain anything anymore to their spouse? I've lost that count.
There is a price for this type of life.
In Russia, all war monuments have this beautiful inscription at the top.
It says, (In Russian) "No one is forgotten, nothing is forgotten." I do not forget my lost colleagues.
I cannot forget anything.
I call on you to remember their dedication and demand that humanitarian aid workers around the world be better protected.
We should not let that light of hope they have brought to be switched off.
After my ordeal, a lot of colleagues asked me, "But why do you continue? Why do you do this sort of job? Why do you have to go back to it?" My answer was very simple: If I had quit, They would have taken my soul and my humanity.
Thank you.
15,000 people, between Leeds and Manchester, She was still there at the school A) "I was terrible at math, but it wasn't my fault.
and get a credential at the end of it.
we looked at it, and we said, there are two problems.
belonging to that community of humanitarian aid workers He was diagnosed with a canine compulsive disorder There are 330 tubes, diameter 55 [centimeters], "Of course you have to have a handrail." So that's reassuring, you know.
Today, not so much has changed.
so that I could pursue my dream.
that growing up, I didn't always understand in the way that I do now.
Because half the world's population runs the risk and he wanted us to use our eyes, incredible dedication I finally allowed myself to accept And if we're being honest, none of those things and look like an aggressive hulk.
is 150 billion degrees C.
probably one of the greatest collective efforts and what they had found was things like pollen Scott and his rival Sir Ernest Shackleton, but nobody on the team had any background in chemistry or biology or life sciences, their courtship and sex lives, but thinking makes it so.
and a potential barrier to a scientific career.
People built one Bionicle after another.
for example right here.
is something that was already presented in TED scorecard, evaluation, coordination with the 25 other coordinators Some passengers overheard them, somehow misconstrued the littlest things you brought into the world We need to change the culture in our jails and prisons, especially for young inmates.
New York state is one of only two in the U.S.
that automatically arrests and tries 16- to 17-year-olds as adults.
you say, "I'm a mathematician." (Laughter) and puts them in a hostile environment, and being trained as a potter There's not really much for these young people to do to actually enhance their talent and actually rehabilitate them.
Until we can raise the age of criminal responsibility to 18, we need to focus on changing the daily lives of these young people.
I know firsthand.
Before I ever turned 18, I spent approximately 400 days on Rikers Island, and to add to that I spent almost 300 days in solitary confinement, and let me tell you this: Screaming at the top of your lungs all day on your cell door or screaming at the top of your lungs out the window, it gets tiring.
Since there's not much for you to do while you're in there, a method called functional magnetic resonance imaging.
you start talking to yourself, your thoughts start running wild, and then your thoughts become your own worst enemy.
Jails are actually supposed to rehabilitate a person, not cause him or her to become more angry, frustrated, and feel more hopeless.
Since there's not a discharge plan put in place for these young people, they pretty much reenter society with nothing.
And there's not really much for them to do to keep them from recidivating.
But it all starts with the C.O.s.
It's very easy for some people to look at these correctional officers as the good guys and the inmates as the bad guys, or vice versa for some, but it's a little more than that.
See, these C.O.s are normal, everyday people.
They come from the same neighborhoods as the population they "serve." They're just normal people.
They're not robots, and there's nothing special about them.
They do pretty much everything anybody else in society does.
The male C.O.s want to talk and flirt with the female C.O.s.
They play the little high school kid games with each other.
They politic with one another.
And the female C.O.s gossip to each other.
So I spent numerous amounts of time with numerous amounts of C.O.s, and let me tell you about this one in particular named Monroe.
One day he pulled me in between the A and B doors which separate the north and south sides of our housing unit.
He pulled me there because I had a physical altercation with another young man in my housing unit, and he felt, since there was a female officer working on the floor, that I violated his shift.
So he punched me in my chest.
He kind of knocked the wind out of me.
I wasn't impulsive, I didn't react right away, because I know this is their house.
I have no wins.
All he has to do is pull his pin and backup will come immediately.
So I just gave him a look in his eyes and I guess he saw the anger and frustration just burning, and he said to me, "Your eyes are going to get you in a lot of trouble, because you're looking like you want to fight." So he commenced to taking off his utility belt, he took off his shirt and his badge, and he said, "We could fight." So I asked him, "You gonna hold it down?" Now, that's a term that's commonly used on Rikers Island meaning that you're not going to say anything to anybody, and you're not going to report it.
He said, "Yeah, I'm gonna hold it down. You gonna hold it down?" I didn't even respond.
I just punched him right in his face, and we began fighting right then and there.
Towards the end of the fight, he slammed me up against the wall, so while we were tussled up, he said to me, "You good?" as if he got the best of me, but in my mind, I know I got the best of him, so I replied very cocky, "Oh, I'm good, you good?" He said, "Yeah, I'm good, I'm good." We let go, he shook my hand, said he gave me my respect, gave me a cigarette and sent me on my way.
Believe it or not, you come across some C.O.s on Rikers Island that'll fight you one-on-one.
They feel that they understand how it is, and they feel that I'm going to meet you where you're at.
Since this is how you commonly handle your disputes, we can handle it in that manner.
I walk away from it like a man, you walk away from it like a man, and that's it.
Some C.O.s feel that they're jailing with you.
This is why they have that mentality and that attitude and they go by that concept.
In some instances, we're in it together with the C.O.s.
However, institutions need to give these correctional officers proper trainings on how to properly deal with the adolescent population, and they also need to give them proper trainings on how to deal with the mental health population as well.
These C.O.s play a big factor in these young people's lives for x amount of time until a disposition is reached on their case.
So why not try to mentor these young people while they're there? Why not try to give them some type of insight to make a change, so once they reenter back into society, they're doing something positive? A second big thing to help our teens in jails is better programming.
When I was on Rikers Island, the huge thing was solitary confinement.
Solitary confinement was originally designed to break a person mentally, physically and emotionally.
That's what it was designed for.
The U.S. Attorney General recently released a report stating that they're going to ban solitary confinement in New York state for teens.
One thing that kept me sane while I was in solitary confinement was reading.
I tried to educate myself as much as possible.
I read any and everything I could get my hands on.
And aside from that, I wrote music and short stories.
or make an arrest of someone in their home.
are art therapy programs for the kids that like to draw and have that talent, and what about the young individuals that are musically inclined? How about a music program for them that actually teaches them how to write and make music? Just a thought.
When adolescents come to Rikers Island, C74, RNDC is the building that they're housed in.
That's nicknamed "gladiator school," because you have a young individual coming in from the street thinking that they're tough, being surrounded by a bunch of other young individuals from all of the five boroughs, and everybody feels that they're tough.
So now you have a bunch of young gentlemen poking their chests out feeling that I have to prove I'm equally as tough as you or I'm tougher than you, you and you.
But let's be honest: That culture is very dangerous and damaging to our young people.
We need to help institutions and these teens realize that they don't have to lead the previous lifestyle that they led when they were on the street, that they can actually make a change.
It's sad to report that while I was in prison, I used to hear dudes talking about when they get released from prison, to help us to label these images.
when they get back in the street.
The conversations used to sound something like this: "Oh, when I hit the street, my brother got this connection for this, that and the third," or, "My man over here got this connection for the low price.
Let's exchange information," and, "When we hit the town, we're going to do it real big." I used to hear these conversations and think to myself, "Wow, these dudes are really talking about going back in the street and committing future crimes." So I came up with a name for that: I called it a go-back-to-jail-quick scheme because really, how long is that going to last? You get a retirement plan with that? The free man who walked out of the courtroom You get health insurance? Dental? (Laughter) But I will tell you this: Being in jail and being in prison, I came across some of the most intelligent, brilliant, and talented people that I would ever meet.
I've seen individuals take a potato chip bag and turn it into the most beautiful picture frame.
I've seen individuals take the state soap that's provided for free and turn them into the most beautiful sculptures that would make Michelangelo look like a kindergartner made it.
At the age of 21, I was in a maximum-security prison called Elmira Correctional Facility.
I just came out of the weight shack from working out, and I saw an older gentleman that I knew standing in the middle of the yard just looking up at the sky.
Mind you, this older gentlemen was serving a 33-and-a-third-to-life sentence in which he already had served 20 years of that sentence.
So I walk up to him and I said, "O.G., what's going on, man, you good?" He looked at me, and he said, "Yeah, I'm good, young blood." I'm like, "So what are you looking up at the sky for, man? What's so fascinating up there?" He said, "You look up and you tell me what you see." "Clouds." (Laughter) He said, "All right. What else do you see?" At that time, it was a plane passing by.
I said, "All right, I see an airplane." He said, "Exactly, and what's on that airplane?" "People." "Exactly. Now where's that plane and those people going?" "I don't know. You know? Please let me know if you do. Then let me get some lottery numbers." He said, "You're missing the big picture, young blood.
That plane with those people is going somewhere, while we're here stuck.
The big picture is this: That plane with those people going somewhere, that's life passing us by while we behind these walls, stuck." Ever since that day, that sparked something in my mind and made me know I had to make a change.
Growing up, I was always a good, smart kid.
Some people would say I was a little too smart for my own good.
I had dreams of becoming an architect or an archaeologist.
Currently, I'm working at the Fortune Society, which is a reentry program, and I work with people as a case manager that are at high risk for recidivism.
So I connect them with the services that they need once they're released from jail and prison so they can make a positive transition back into society.
If I was to see my 15-year-old self today, I would sit down and talk to him and try to educate him and I would let him know, "Listen, this is me. I'm you.
or even just by simple, single-celled microbial life.
Everything that you're about to do, I know what you're gonna do before you do it because I already did it, and I would encourage him not to hang out with x, y and z people.
I would tell him not to be in such-and-such place.
I would tell him, keep your behind in school, man, because that's where you need to be, because that's what's going to get you somewhere in life.
This is the message that we should be sharing with our young men and young women.
We shouldn't be treating them as adults and putting them in cultures of violence that are nearly impossible for them to escape.
Thank you.
(Applause) Today I'm going to speak to you about the last 30 years of architectural history.
That's a lot to pack into 18 minutes.
It's a complex topic, so we're just going to dive right in at a complex place: New Jersey.
Because 30 years ago, I'm from Jersey, and I was six, and I lived there in my parents' house in a town called Livingston, and this was my childhood bedroom.
Around the corner from my bedroom was the bathroom that I used to share with my sister.
And in between my bedroom and the bathroom was a balcony that overlooked the family room.
And that's where everyone would hang out and watch TV, so that every time that I walked from my bedroom to the bathroom, everyone would see me, and every time I took a shower and would come back in a towel, everyone would see me.
And I looked like this.
I was awkward, insecure, and I hated it.
I hated that walk, I hated that balcony, I hated that room, and I hated that house.
And that's architecture.
(Laughter) Done.
That feeling, those emotions that I felt, that's the power of architecture, because architecture is not about math and it's not about zoning, it's about those visceral, emotional connections that we feel to the places that we occupy.
And it's no surprise that we feel that way, because according to the EPA, Americans spend 90 percent of their time indoors.
That's 90 percent of our time surrounded by architecture.
That's huge.
That means that architecture is shaping us in ways that we didn't even realize.
That makes us a little bit gullible and very, very predictable.
It means that when I show you a building like this, I know what you think: You think "power" and "stability" and "democracy." And I know you think that because it's based on a building you have put together a great team, This is a trick.
This is a trigger that architects use to get you to create an emotional connection to the forms that we build our buildings out of.
It's a predictable emotional connection, and we've been using this trick for a long, long time.
We used it [200] years ago to build banks.
We used it in the 19th century to build art museums.
And in the 20th century in America, we used it to build houses.
And look at these solid, stable little soldiers facing the ocean and keeping away the elements.
This is really, really useful, because building things is terrifying.
It's expensive, it takes a long time, and it's very complicated.
And the people that build things -- developers and governments -- they're naturally afraid of innovation, and they'd rather just use those forms that they know you'll respond to.
That's how we end up with buildings like this.
This is a nice building.
This is the Livingston Public Library that was completed in 2004 in my hometown, and, you know, it's got a dome and it's got this round thing and columns, red brick, and you can kind of guess what Livingston is trying to say with this building: children, property values and history.
But it doesn't have much to do with what a library actually does today.
That same year, in 2004, on the other side of the country, another library was completed, and it looks like this.
It's in Seattle.
and we think they may have been used to walk on soft sediment, (Laughter) a place to gather and read and share.
So how is it possible that in the same year, in the same country, two buildings, both called libraries, look so completely different? And the answer is that architecture works on the principle of a pendulum.
On the one side is innovation, and architects are constantly pushing, pushing for new technologies, new typologies, new solutions for the way that we live today.
And we push and we push and we push until we completely alienate all of you.
We wear all black, we get very depressed, you think we're adorable, we're dead inside because we've got no choice.
We have to go to the other side and reengage those symbols that we know you love.
So we do that, and you're happy, we feel like sellouts, so we start experimenting again and we push the pendulum back and back and forth and back and forth we've gone for the last 300 years, and certainly for the last 30 years.
Okay, 30 years ago we were coming out of the '70s.
Architects had been busy experimenting with something called brutalism.
It's about concrete.
(Laughter) You can guess this.
Small windows, dehumanizing scale.
This is really tough stuff.
So as we get closer to the '80s, we start to reengage those symbols.
We push the pendulum back into the other direction.
We take these forms that we know you love and we update them.
We add neon and we add pastels and we use new materials.
And you love it.
And we can't give you enough of it.
We take Chippendale armoires and we turned those into skyscrapers, and skyscrapers can be medieval castles made out of glass.
Forms got big, forms got bold and colorful.
Dwarves became columns.
(Laughter) Swans grew to the size of buildings.
It was crazy.
But it's the '80s, it's cool.
(Laughter) We're all hanging out in malls and we're all moving to the suburbs, and out there, out in the suburbs, we can create our own architectural fantasies.
And those fantasies, they can be Mediterranean or French or Italian.
(Laughter) Possibly with endless breadsticks.
This is the thing about postmodernism.
This is the thing about symbols.
They're easy, they're cheap, because instead of making places, we're making memories of places.
Because I know, and I know all of you know, this isn't Tuscany.
This is Ohio.
(Laughter) So architects get frustrated, and we start pushing the pendulum back into the other direction.
In the late '80s and early '90s, we start experimenting with something called deconstructivism.
We throw out historical symbols, we rely on new, computer-aided design techniques, and we come up with new compositions, forms crashing into forms.
This is academic and heady stuff, it's super unpopular, we totally alienate you.
Ordinarily, the pendulum would just swing back into the other direction.
And then, something amazing happened.
In 1997, this building opened.
This is the Guggenheim Bilbao, by Frank Gehry.
And this building fundamentally changes the world's relationship to architecture.
Paul Goldberger said that Bilbao was one of those rare moments when critics, academics, and the general public were completely united around a building.
The New York Times called this building a miracle.
Tourism in Bilbao increased 2,500 percent after this building was completed.
So all of a sudden, everybody wants one of these buildings: L.A., Seattle, Chicago, New York, Cleveland, Springfield.
(Laughter) Everybody wants one, and Gehry is everywhere.
He is our very first starchitect.
Now, how is it possible that these forms -- they're wild and radical -- how is it possible that they become so ubiquitous throughout the world? And it happened because media so successfully galvanized around them that they quickly taught us that these forms mean culture and tourism.
We created an emotional reaction to these forms.
So did every mayor in the world.
So every mayor knew that if they had these forms, they had culture and tourism.
This phenomenon at the turn of the new millennium happened to a few other starchitects.
It happened to Zaha and it happened to Libeskind, and what happened to these elite few architects at the turn of the new millennium could actually start to happen to the entire field of architecture, as digital media starts to increase the speed with which we consume information.
Because think about how you consume architecture.
A thousand years ago, you would have had to have walked to the village next door to see a building.
Transportation speeds up: You can take a boat, you can take a plane, you can be a tourist.
Technology speeds up: You can see it in a newspaper, on TV, until finally, we are all architectural photographers, and the building has become disembodied from the site.
Architecture is everywhere now, and that means that the speed of communication has finally caught up to the speed of architecture.
Because architecture actually moves quite quickly.
It doesn't take long to think about a building.
It takes a long time to build a building, three or four years, and in the interim, an architect will design two or eight or a hundred other buildings before they know if that building that they designed four years ago was a success or not.
That's because there's never been a good feedback loop in architecture.
That's how we end up with buildings like this.
Brutalism wasn't a two-year movement, it was a 20-year movement.
For 20 years, we were producing buildings like this because we had no idea how much you hated it.
It's never going to happen again, I think, because we are living on the verge of the greatest revolution in architecture since the invention of concrete, of steel, or of the elevator, and it's a media revolution.
So my theory is that when you apply media to this pendulum, it starts swinging faster and faster, until it's at both extremes nearly simultaneously, and that effectively blurs the difference between innovation and symbol, between us, the architects, and you, the public.
Now we can make nearly instantaneous, emotionally charged symbols out of something that's brand new.
Let me show you how this plays out in a project that my firm recently completed.
We were hired to replace this building, which burned down.
This is the center of a town called the Pines in Fire Island in New York State.
It's a vacation community.
We proposed a building that was audacious, that was different than any of the forms that the community was used to, and we were scared and our client was scared and the community was scared, so we created a series of photorealistic renderings that we put onto Facebook and we put onto Instagram, and we let people start to do what they do: share it, comment, like it, hate it.
But that meant that two years before the building was complete, it was already a part of the community, so that when the renderings looked exactly like the finished product, there were no surprises.
This building was already a part of this community, and then that first summer, when people started arriving and sharing the building on social media, the building ceased to be just an edifice and it became media, because these, these are not just pictures of a building, they're your pictures of a building.
And as you use them to tell your story, they become part of your personal narrative, and what you're doing is you're short-circuiting all of our collective memory, and you're making these charged symbols for us to understand.
That means we don't need the Greeks anymore to tell us what to think about architecture.
We can tell each other what we think about architecture, because digital media hasn't just changed the relationship between all of us, it's changed the relationship between us and buildings.
Think for a second about those librarians back in Livingston.
If that building was going to be built today, the first thing they would do is go online and search "new libraries." They would be bombarded by examples of experimentation, of innovation, of pushing at the envelope of what a library can be.
That's ammunition.
That's ammunition that they can take with them to the mayor of Livingston, to the people of Livingston, and say, there's no one answer to what a library is today.
Let's be a part of this.
This abundance of experimentation gives them the freedom to run their own experiment.
Everything is different now.
Architects are no longer these mysterious creatures that use big words and complicated drawings, and you aren't the hapless public, the consumer that won't accept anything that they haven't seen anymore.
Architects can hear you, and you're not intimidated by architecture.
That means that that pendulum swinging back and forth from style to style, from movement to movement, is irrelevant.
is that the rate of development in computer processing and find relevant solutions to the problems that our society faces.
This is the end of architectural history, and it means that the buildings of tomorrow are going to look a lot different than the buildings of today.
It means that a public space in the ancient city of Seville can be unique and tailored to the way that a modern city works.
It means that a stadium in Brooklyn can be a stadium in Brooklyn, not some red-brick historical pastiche of what we think a stadium ought to be.
It means that robots are going to build our buildings, because we're finally ready for the forms that they're going to produce.
And it means that buildings will twist to the whims of nature instead of the other way around.
It means that a parking garage in Miami Beach, Florida, can also be a place for sports and for yoga and you can even get married there late at night.
(Laughter) It means that three architects can dream about swimming in the East River of New York, and then raise nearly half a million dollars from a community that gathered around their cause, no one client anymore.
It means that no building is too small for innovation, like this little reindeer pavilion that's as muscly and sinewy as the animals it's designed to observe.
And it means that a building doesn't have to be beautiful to be lovable, like this ugly little building in Spain, where the architects dug a hole, packed it with hay, and then poured concrete around it, and when the concrete dried, they invited someone to come and clean that hay out so that all that's left when it's done is this hideous little room that's filled with the imprints and scratches of how that place was made, and that becomes the most sublime place to watch a Spanish sunset.
Because it doesn't matter if a cow builds our buildings or a robot builds our buildings.
It doesn't matter how we build, it matters what we build.
Architects already know how to make buildings that are greener and smarter and friendlier.
We've just been waiting for all of you to want them.
And finally, we're not on opposite sides anymore.
Find an architect, hire an architect, work with us to design better buildings, better cities, and a better world, because the stakes are high.
Buildings don't just reflect our society, they shape our society down to the smallest spaces: the local libraries, the homes where we raise our children, and the walk that they take from the bedroom to the bathroom.
Thank you.
(Applause) About 12 years ago, I gave up my career in banking to try to make the world a safer place.
This involved a journey into national and global advocacy and meeting some of the most extraordinary people in the world.
In the process, I became a civil society diplomat.
Civil society diplomats do three things: They voice the concerns of the people, are not pinned down by national interests, and influence change through citizen networks, not only state ones.
And if you want to change the world, we need more of them.
But many people still ask, "Can civil society really make a big difference? Can citizens influence and shape national and global policy?" I never thought I would ask myself these questions, but here I am to share some lessons it has been covered little by little They are in issues that I'm passionate about: gun control and drug policy.
And these are issues that matter here.
Latin America is ground zero for both of them.
For example, Brazil -- this beautiful country hosting TEDGlobal has the world's ugliest record.
We are the number one champion in homicidal violence.
One in every 10 people killed around the world is a Brazilian.
This translates into over 56,000 people dying violently each year.
Most of them are young, black boys dying by guns.
Brazil is also one of the world's largest consumers of drugs, and the War on Drugs has been especially painful here.
Around 50 percent of the homicides in the streets in Brazil are related to the War on Drugs.
The same is true for about 25 percent of people in jail.
And it's not just Brazil that is affected by the twin problems of guns and drugs.
Virtually every country and city across Central and South America is in trouble.
Latin America has nine percent of the world's population, but 25 percent of its global violent deaths.
These are not problems we can run away from.
I certainly could not.
So the first campaign I got involved with started here in 2003 to change Brazil's gun law and to create a program to buy back weapons.
In just a few years, we not only changed national legislation but we collected and destroyed almost half a million weapons.
This was one of the biggest buyback programs in history -- (Applause) -- but we also suffered some setbacks.
We lost a referendum to ban gun sales to civilians in 2005.
The second initiative was also home-grown, but is today a global movement to reform the international drug control regime.
I am the executive coordinator So the media was filled with stories about The commission is a high-level group and effective approaches to the issue of drugs.
Since we started in 2008, the taboo on drugs is broken.
Across the Americas, from the US and Mexico to Colombia and Uruguay, change is in the air.
But rather than tell you the whole story about these two movements, I just want to share with you four key insights.
I call them lessons to change the world.
There are certainly many more, but these are the ones that stand out to me.
So the first lesson is: Change and control the narrative.
It may seem obvious, but a key ingredient to civil society diplomacy And so to think again, This is something that veteran politicians understand, but that civil society groups generally do not do very well.
In the case of drug policy, our biggest success has been to change the discussion away from prosecuting a War on Drugs to putting people's health and safety first.
In a cutting-edge report we just launched in New York, we also showed that the groups benefiting most from this $320 billion market are criminal gangs and cartels.
So in order to undermine the power and profit of these groups, we need to change the conversation.
We need to make illegal drugs legal.
But before I get you too excited, I don't mean drugs should be a free-for-all.
What I'm talking about, and what the Global Commission advocates for is creating a highly regulated market, where different drugs would have different degrees of regulation.
As for gun control, we were successful in changing, but not so much in controlling, the narrative.
And this brings me to my next lesson: Never underestimate your opponents.
If you want to succeed in changing the world, you need to know who you're up against.
You need to learn their motivations and points of view.
In the case of gun control, we really underestimated our opponents.
After a very successful gun-collection program, we were elated.
We had support from 80 percent of Brazilians, was a testament to the wildness I traded for those touristy beaches.
to ban gun sales to civilians.
But we were dead wrong.
During a televised 20-day public debate, our opponent used our own arguments against us.
We ended up losing the popular vote.
It was really terrible.
The National Rifle Association -- yes, the American NRA -- came to Brazil.
They inundated our campaign with their propaganda, that as you know, links the right to own guns to ideas of freedom and democracy.
They simply threw everything at us.
They used our national flag, our independence anthem.
They invoked women's rights and misused images of Mandela, Tiananmen Square, and even Hitler.
They won by playing with people's fears.
In fact, guns were almost completely ignored in their campaign.
Their focus was on individual rights.
But I ask you, which right is more important, the right to life or the right to have a gun that takes life away? (Applause) We thought people would vote in defense of life, but in a country with a recent past of military dictatorship, the anti-government message of our opponents resonated, and we were not prepared to respond.
Lesson learned.
We've been more successful in the case of drug policy.
If you asked most people 10 years ago if an end to the War on Drugs was possible, they would have laughed.
After all, there are huge military police prisons and financial establishments benefiting from this war.
But today, the international drug control regime is starting to crumble.
Governments and civil societies are experimenting with new approaches.
The Global Commission on Drug Policy really knew its opposition, and rather than fighting them, our chair -- former Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso -- reached out to leaders from across the political spectrum, from liberals to conservatives.
This high level group agreed to honestly discuss the merits and flaws of drug policies.
It was this reasoned, informed and strategic discussion that revealed the sad truth about the War on Drugs.
The War on Drugs has simply failed across every metric.
Drugs are cheaper and more available than ever, and consumption has risen globally.
But even worse, it also generated massive negative unintended consequences.
It is true that some people have made these arguments before, but we've made a difference by anticipating the arguments of our opponents and by leveraging powerful voices that a few years ago would probably have resisted change.
Third lesson: Use data to drive your argument.
Guns and drugs are emotive issues, and as we've painfully learned in the gun referendum campaign in Brazil, sometimes it's impossible to cut through the emotions and get to the facts.
But this doesn't mean that we shouldn't try.
Until quite recently, we simply didn't know how many Brazilians were killed by guns.
Amazingly, it was a local soap opera called "Mulheres Apaixonadas" -- or "Women in Love" -- that kicked off Brazil's national gun control campaign.
In one highly viewed episode, a soap opera lead actress was killed by a stray bullet.
Brazilian grannies and housewives were outraged, and in a case of art imitating life, this episode also included footage of a real gun control march that we had organized right here, outside in Copacabana Beach.
We decided to listen and not preach.
Within weeks, our national congress approved the disarmament bill that had been languishing for years.
We were then able to mobilize data to show the successful outcomes of the change in the law and gun collection program.
Here is what I mean: We could prove that in just one year, we saved more than 5,000 lives.
(Applause) And in the case of drugs, in order to undermine this fear and prejudice that surrounds the issue, we managed to gather and present data that shows that today's drug policies cause much more harm than drug use per se, and people are starting to get it.
My fourth insight is: Don't be afraid to bring together odd bedfellows.
What we've learned in Brazil -- and this doesn't only apply to my country -- is the importance of bringing diverse and eclectic folks together.
If you want to change the world, it helps to have a good cross-section of society on your side.
In both the case of guns and drugs, we brought together a wonderful mix of people.
We mobilized the elite and got huge support from the media.
We gathered the victims, human rights champions, cultural icons.
We also assembled the professional classes -- doctors, lawyers, academia and more.
What I've learned over the last years is that you need coalitions of the willing and of the unwilling to make change.
In the case of drugs, we needed libertarians, anti-prohibitionists, legalizers, and liberal politicians.
They may not agree on everything; in fact, they disagree on almost everything.
But the legitimacy of the campaign is based on their diverse points of view.
Over a decade ago, I had a comfortable future working for an investment bank.
I was as far removed from the world of civil society diplomacy as you can imagine.
But I took a chance.
I changed course, and on the way, I helped to create social movements Each and every one of us has the power to change the world.
No matter what the issue, and no matter how hard the fight, civil society is central to the blueprint for change.
Thank you.
(Applause) My name is Harry Baker. Harry Baker is my name.
If your name was Harry Baker, then our names would be the same.
(Laughter) It's a short introductory part.
Yeah, I'm Harry.
I study maths. I write poetry.
So I thought I'd start with a love poem about prime numbers.
(Laughter) This is called "59." I was going to call it "Prime Time Loving." That reaction is why I didn't.
(Laughter) So, "59." 59 wakes up on the wrong side of the bed.
Realizes all his hair is on one side of his head.
Takes just under a minute to work out that its because of the way that he slept.
He finds some clothes and gets dressed.
He cant help but look in the mirror and be subtly impressed How he looks rough around the edges and yet casually messed.
And as he glances out the window, he sees the sight that he gets blessed with of 60 from across the street.
Now 60 was beautiful.
With perfectly trimmed cuticles, dressed in something suitable.
Never rude or crude at all.
Unimprovable, right on time as usual, more on cue than a snooker ball but liked to play it super cool.
59 wanted to tell her that he knew her favorite flower.
He thought of her every second, every minute, every hour.
But he knew it wouldnt work, hed never get the girl.
Because although she lived across the street they came from different worlds.
While 59 admired 60s perfectly round figure, 60 thought 59 was odd. (Laughter) One of his favorite films was "101 Dalmatians." She preferred the sequel.
He romanticized the idea they were star-crossed lovers.
They could overcome the odds and evens because they had each other.
While she maintained the strict views imposed on her by her mother That separate could not be equal.
And though at the time he felt stupid and dumb For trying to love a girl controlled by her stupid mum, He should have been comforted by the simple sum.
Take 59 away from 60, and youre left with the one.
Sure enough after two months of moping around, 61 days later, 61 was who he found, He had lost his keys and his parents were out.
So one day after school he went into a house As he noticed the slightly wonky numbers on the door, He wondered why hed never introduced himself before, As she let him in, his jaw dropped in awe.
61 was like 60, but a little bit more. (Laughter) She had prettier eyes, and an approachable smile, and you can almost think of it as a way to extend our sense of touch.
And like him, everything was in disorganized piles, And like him, her mum didnt mind if friends stayed a while.
Because she was like him, and he liked her.
He reckoned she would like him if she knew he was like her, And it was different this time. I mean, this girl was wicked, So he plucked up the courage and asked for her digits.
She said, "I'm 61." He grinned, said, "I'm 59." Today Ive had a really nice time, So tomorrow if you wanted you could come over to mine? She said, "Sure." She loved talking to someone just as quirky, She agreed to this unofficial first date.
In the end he was only ready one minute early, But it didnt matter because she arrived one minute late.
And from that moment on there was nonstop chatter, How they loved "X Factor," how they had two factors, How that did not matter, distinctiveness made them better, By the end of the night they knew they were meant together.
And one day she was talking about stuck-up 60, She noticed that 59 looked a bit shifty.
He blushed, told her of his crush: The best thing that never happened because it led to us. 61 was clever, see, not prone to jealousy, She looked him in the eyes and told him quite tenderly, "Youre 59, Im 61, together we combine to become twice what 60 could ever be." (Laughter) At this point 59 had tears in his eyes, Was so glad to have this one-of-a-kind girl in his life.
He told her the very definition of being prime Was that with only one and himself could his heart divide, And she was the one he wanted to give his heart to, She said she felt the same and now she knew the films were half true.
Because that wasn't real love, that love was just a sample, When it came to real love, they were a prime example.
Cheers.
(Applause) That was the first poem that I wrote and it was for a prime number-themed poetry night -- (Laughter) -- which turned out to be a prime number-themed poetry competition.
And I became a prime number-themed poetry competition winner, or as I like to call it, a prime minister. (Laughter) And this is how I discovered these things called poetry slams, and if you don't know what a poetry slam is, it was a format come up with in America 30 years ago as a way of tricking people into going to poetry events by putting an exciting word like "slam" on the end.
(Laughter) And each performer got three minutes to perform and then random audience members would hold up scorecards, and they would end up with a numerical score, and what this meant is, it kind of broke down the barrier between performer and audience and encouraged the kind of connection with the listener.
And what it also means is you can win.
And if you win a poetry slam, you can call yourself a slam champion and pretend you're a wrestler, and if you lose a poetry slam you can say, "Oh, what? Poetry's a subjective art form, you can't put numbers on such things." (Laughter) But I loved it, and I got involved in these slams, and I became the U.K. slam champion and got invited to the Poetry World Cup in Paris, which was unbelievable.
It was people from all around the world speaking in their native languages to be judged by five French strangers.
(Laughter) And somehow, I won, which was great, and I've been able to travel the world since doing it, but it also means that this next piece is technically the best poem in the world.
(Laughter) So...
(Applause) According to five French strangers.
So this is "Paper People." I like people.
I'd like some paper people.
Theyd be purple paper people. Maybe pop-up purple paper people.
Proper pop-up purple paper people.
"How do you prop up pop-up purple paper people?" I hear you cry. Well I ...
Id probably prop up proper pop-up purple paper people with a proper pop-up purple people paperclip, but Id pre-prepare appropriate adhesives as alternatives, a cheeky pack of Blu Tack just in case the paper slipped.
Because I could build a pop-up metropolis.
but I wouldnt wanna deal with all the paper people politics.
paper politicians with their paper-thin policies, broken promises without appropriate apologies.
Thered be a little paper me. And a little paper you.
And we could watch paper TV and it would all be pay-per-view.
(Laughter) Wed see the poppy paper rappers rap about their paper package or watch paper people carriers get stuck in paper traffic on the A4.
(Laughter) Paper.
Thered be a paper princess Kate but wed all stare at paper Pippa, and then wed all live in fear of killer Jack the Paper-Ripper, because the paper propaganda propagates the people's prejudices, papers printing pictures of the photogenic terrorists.
A little paper me. And a little paper you.
And in a pop-up population peoples problems pop up too.
Thered be a pompous paper parliament who remained out of touch, and who ignored the people's protests about all the paper cuts, then the peaceful paper protests would get blown to paper pieces, by the confetti cannons manned by pre-emptive police.
And yes thered still be paper money, so thered still be paper greed, and the paper piggy bankers pocketing more than they need, purchasing the potpourri to pepper their paper properties, others live in poverty and aint acknowledged properly.
A proper poor economy where so many are proper poor, but while their needs are ignored the money goes to big wars.
Origami armies unfold plans for paper planes and we remain imprisoned in our own paper chains, but the greater shame is that it always seems to stay the same, what changes is whos in power choosing how to lay the blame, theyre naming names, forgetting these are names of people, because in the end it all comes down to people.
I like people.
'Cause even when the situations dire, it is only ever people who are able to inspire, and on paper, its hard to see how we all cope.
But in the bottom of Pandoras box theres still hope, and I still hope 'cause I believe in people.
People like my grandparents.
Who every single day since I was born, do they believe with all their hearts -- and we chose liberty and equality.
Thats 7892 days straight of someone checking Im okay, and thats amazing.
People like my aunt who puts on plays with prisoners.
People who are capable of genuine forgiveness.
People like the persecuted Palestinians.
People who go out of their way to make your life better, and expect nothing in return.
You see, people have potential to be powerful.
Just because the people in power tend to pretend to be victims we dont need to succumb to that system.
And a paper population is no different.
Theres a little paper me. And a little paper you.
And in a pop-up population people's problems pop up too, but even if the whole world fell apart then wed still make it through.
Because were people.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much. I've just got time for one more.
For me, poetry has been the ultimate way of ideas without frontiers.
When I first started, the people who inspired me were the ones with the amazing stories, and I thought, as an 18-year-old with a happy life, it was too normal, but I could create these worlds where I could talk about my experiences and dreams and beliefs.
So it's amazing to be here in front of you today.
Thank you for being here.
If you weren't here, it would be pretty much like the sound check yesterday.
(Laughter) And this is more fun.
So this last one is called "The Sunshine Kid." Thank you very much for listening.
Old man sunshine was proud of his sun, And it brightened his day to see his little boy run, Not because of what hed done, nor the problems overcome, But that despite that his disposition remained a sunny one.
It hadnt always been like this.
Thered been times when hed tried to hide his brightness, You see, every star hits periods of hardship, It takes a brighter light to inspire them through the darkness.
If we go back to when he was born in a nebula, We know that he never was thought of as regular, Because he had a flair about him, To say the Midas touch is wrong In fact, nothing expresses that assumption more clearly than three simple numbers: Yes this sun was loved by some more than others, It was a case of Joseph and his dreamcoat and his brothers Because standing out from the crowd had its pros and its cons, And jealousy created enemies in those he outshone by a huge amount, almost down to zero.
Now the Shadow People didnt like the Sunshine Kid, Because he showed up the dark things the Shadow People did, And when he shone he showed the places where the Shadow People hid, So the Shadow People had an evil plan to get rid of him, First up -- they made fun of his sunspots, Shooting his dreams from the sky, their words were gunshots, Designed to remind him he wasnt very cool And he didnt fit in with any popular kids at school.
They said his head was up in space and they would bring him down to Earth, Essentially he came from nothing and that is what he was worth, Hed never get to go to university to learn, Only degrees hed ever show would be the first degree burns From those that came too close, they told him he was too bright, Thats why no one ever looked him in the eyes, His judgment became clouded So did the sky, With evaporated tears as the sun started to cry.
Because the sunshine kid was bright, with a warm personality, And inside he burned savagely Hurt by the words and curses of the shadowy folk who spoke holes in his soul and left cavities, And as his heart hardened, his spark darkened, Every time they called him names it cooled his flames, He thought they might like him if he kept his light dim But they were busy telling lightning she had terrible aim, He couldnt quite get to grips with what they said, So he let his light be eclipsed by what they said, He fell into a Lone Star State like Texas, And felt like hed been punched in his solar plexus.
But thats when Little Miss Sunshine came along Singing her favorite song about how were made to be strong, And you dont have to be wrong to belong, Just be true to who you are, because we are all stars at heart.
Little Miss Sunshine was hot stuff, The kind of girl when you looked at her you forgot stuff, But for him, there was no forgetting her, The minute he saw her her image burned in his retina, She was out of this world, and she accepted him, Something about this girl meant he knew whenever she was next to him, Things werent as dark as they seemed, and he dared to dream, Shadows were nowhere to be seen; when she was there he beamed, His eyes would light up in ways that cant be faked, When she grinned her rays erased the razor-tipped words of hate, They gave each other nicknames, they were "cool star" and "fun sun," And gradually the shadowy damage became undone, She was one in a septillion, and she was brilliant, Could turn the coldest blooded reptilians vermillion, Loved by billions, from Chileans to Brazilians, And taught the Sunshine Kid the meaning of resilience.
She said: All the darkness in the world cannot put out the light from a single candle So how the hell can they handle your light? Only you can choose to dim it, and the sky is the limit, so silence the critics by burning. And if eyes are windows to the soul then she drew back the curtains And let the sun shine through the hurting.
In a universe of adversity these stars stuck together, And though days became nights the memories would last forever, Whether the weatherman said it or not, it would be fine, 'Cause even behind the clouds the kid could still shine.
Yes, the Sunshine Kid was bright, with a warm personality, And inside he burned savagely, Fueled by the fire inspired across galaxies By the girl who showed him belief.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) I'd like to start my performance by saying 90 percent of everything is crap.
(Laughter) It's called Sturgeon's law, and what that means is that the majority of anything is always bad.
I have a giraffe here.
I'm going to throw the giraffe behind my back and whoever catches it is going to help me on this next thing.
Sir, you caught the giraffe.
I have a playing card in my hand.
Freely name any card in the deck.
Audience member: 10 of hearts.
Helder Guimares: 10 of hearts.
You could have named any card in the deck, but you said the 10 of hearts.
Ninety percent of everything is crap, so there's this to prove that Sturgeon was correct.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) Sir, this is not your show.
(Laughter) Keep the giraffe for a moment, okay? Jesus.
(Laughter) Crazy people.
Well, the truth is, why is the majority of everything bad? And my answer is: I think we stop thinking too soon.
in constantly searching for all possible applications.
something that people used to do around the turn of the century -- not this century, the other one.
The idea was to take a piece of paper and fold it inside out using only your weaker hand, in my case, the left hand.
Something that would look like this.
By the way you reacted, I can see your lack of interest.
(Laughter) But that's okay, I understand why.
We stop thinking too soon.
But if we give it a little bit more thought, like a paper clip.
A paper clip makes this a little bit more interesting.
Not only that, if instead of using my hand with the fingers, I use my hand closed into a fist, that makes this even a little bit more interesting.
Not only that, but I will impose myself a time limit of one second, something that would look like this.
Now -- no, no, no.
Sturgeon may be correct.
But he doesn't have to be correct forever.
Things can always change.
Sir, what was the card? The 10 of hearts? There's this to prove that things can always change -- the 10 of hearts.
(Applause) Secrets are important.
And secrets are valuable.
And this is the best secret I've ever experienced.
It starts with a deck of cards onto the table, an old man and a claim, "I will not touch the deck till the end." It doesn't matter who the man was, all that matters was that sentence ringing in my head: "I will not touch the deck till the end." Now, during all this time, he was holding a small notebook that sometimes he would open and flip through the pages and look at something.
But I was not really paying attention to the book because I was paying attention the deck and the claim he had made before, "I will not touch the deck till the end." Now sir, you have the giraffe.
Go ahead, throw it in any direction so that you can find someone else at random.
Perfect. Sir, you're going to play my role in this story.
The old man turned to me and he said, "You could pick a red card or a black card." My answer was ...
Audience member 2: The black card.
HG: Indeed! It was a black card.
He said, "It could be a club or a spade," and my answer was ...
Audience member 2: Spade.
HG: Indeed! It was a spade.
He said, "It could be a high spade or a low spade." And my answer was ...
Audience member 2: A high spade.
HG: Indeed! It was a high spade.
Since it's a high spade, it could be a nine, a 10, a jack, king, queen or the ace of spades.
And my answer was ...
Audience member 2: The king.
HG: The king of spades, indeed.
Now sir, let's be fair.
You selected black, you selected spade, you selected the high spade, and you selected -- sorry? Audience member 2: King. HG: King of spades.
Did you feel I influenced you in any decision? Audience member 2: No, I just felt your energy.
HG: But it was a free choice, correct? Because if not, we could start all over again.
But it was really fair? Audience member 2: Absolutely.
HG: Now, the old man turned to me and he asked me one more question, a number between one and 52.
And the first number I thought of was ...
Audience member 2: 17.
HG: Indeed! It was the 17.
The old man only said one more thing: "This is the end." And I knew exactly what that meant.
I knew that he was going to touch the deck.
Everything that you're about to see is exactly as it looked.
He took the deck out of the box.
Nothing in the box.
He counted, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10." The tension was building.
(Laughter) "11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17." And on the 17, instead of the king of spades, something appeared in the middle of the deck, that later, I would realize was actually a secret.
The old man stood up, he left.
I never saw him again.
But he left his notebook that was there from the beginning.
And when I picked it up, that was the best secret I've ever experienced.
We are defined by the secrets we keep and by the secrets we share.
And this was his way of sharing a secret with me.
(Applause) Crazy shit! Now -- (Laughter) I believe that amazing things happen all the time.
I really do.
And the reason why we don't see them as often, it's because we don't place ourselves in a position to search for those amazing things.
But what if we decided to search for those amazing things, for those small coincidences in life that are truly amazing? So you have the giraffe, go ahead, throw it in any direction so you find one last person at random.
Sir, I'm going to ask you, do you have, with you, a United States $1 bill? Audience member 3: I think so.
HG: Yes? You see, a coincidence! (Laughter) Let's make sure you have it.
Do you have it? Audience member 3: Yes. HG: Yes! Perfect.
Now, I want you to do exactly the same thing I am about to do.
I have a dollar bill here to explain.
I want you to take the dollar bill, and fold the Washington part inside, like this.
So you get this kind of big square, okay? Now, I want you to take the bill and fold it like this, lengthwise, so it becomes like a rectangle, and then again -- really fold it, really crease it -- and when you have it, please fold the bill again into a little square like this and let me know when you have it.
Do you have it? Perfect.
Now, I'm going to approach, and before we start, I want to make sure that we do this in very, very serious conditions.
First of all, I want to ensure that we have a marker and we have a paper clip.
First of all, take the marker and go ahead and sign the bill.
And this is the reason why: later, I'm going to be doing a bunch of stuff on stage and I don't want you to think, oh, while I was distracted by Helder, someone came onstage and swapped the bill.
So I want to make sure it's exactly the same bill.
Now not only that, I want you to take the paper clip and put it around the bill.
So even if nobody comes onstage and switches the bill, I don't have enough time to go open the bill and close it and see what I don't want to see.
Is that fair? Now you can give me the marker back.
And just like that, very clearly, I want to make sure that we place this in full view from the beginning of this experience and to make sure that everyone is going to see it, we're going to actually have a camera man onstage.
Yes, perfect, so that you can see.
That's your signature? Yes? Perfect.
Now, we're going to use also the deck and a glass for this.
And we're going to put ourselves in a position to search for an amazing coincidence.
Do you mind, can you help me with this? Go ahead and take some cards and shuffle.
And do you mind, can you take some cards and shuffle? You can take some cards and shuffle.
You can shuffle cards in a variety of ways.
You can shuffle cards like this.
You can shuffle cards in a more messed up way, something like this.
You can shuffle cards in the American way.
As a Portuguese, I don't feel entitled to teach you guys how to do it.
But the important part is after shuffling the cards, always remember to cut and complete the cards.
Do you mind doing that for me, sir? Please cut and complete.
And when you have it, place the cards up in the air.
And you too, cut and complete and up in the air.
Up in the air.
A deck of cards cut and shuffled by one, two, three, four and five people.
Now, very clearly, I'm going to gather the deck together.
And just like that.
I'm going to search for a coincidence in front of everyone.
I'm going to try.
I have some cards that maybe, maybe they don't mean anything.
But maybe that's because we are not paying close attention.
Because maybe, maybe they mean a lot.
Before we start, sir, you gave me a dollar bill.
Is that your signature? Audience member 3: Yes it is.
HG: I want you to see very clearly that I'm going to open your bill and reveal a small secret that we created.
And the secret of this dollar bill is the serial number.
Madam, can you take the dollar bill? In the serial number, there is a letter.
What is the first number after the letter? Audience member 4: Seven.
HG: Seven.
Seven.
But, that's maybe just one coincidence.
What is the second number? Audience member 4: Nine.
So after the seven, we have a nine.
And after the nine? Audience member 4: Two.
HG: The two. And after the two? Audience member 4: Three.
HG: Three, and after? Audience member 4: Three. HG: Three.
Audience member 4: Seven. HG: Seven.
Audience member 4: Four. HG: Four.
Audience member 4: Two. HG: Two, and? Audience member 4: Q.
HG: Q like in queen? (Applause) The queen of clubs! All the cards in order, just for you.
And that's my show.
Thank you very much and have a nice night.
(Applause) Six thousand miles of road, 600 miles of subway track, 400 miles of bike lanes and a half a mile of tram track, if you've ever been to Roosevelt Island.
These are the numbers that make up the infrastructure of New York City.
I study maths. I write poetry.
They're the kind of numbers you can find released in reports by city agencies.
For example, the Department of Transportation will probably tell you how many miles of road they maintain.
The MTA will boast how many miles of subway track there are.
Most city agencies give us statistics.
This is from a report this year from the Taxi and Limousine Commission, where we learn that there's about 13,500 taxis here in New York City.
Pretty interesting, right? But did you ever think about where these numbers came from? Because for these numbers to exist, someone at the city agency had to stop and say, hmm, here's a number that somebody might want want to know.
Here's a number that our citizens want to know.
So they go back to their raw data, they count, they add, they calculate, and then they put out reports, and those reports will have numbers like this.
The problem is, how do they know all of our questions? We have lots of questions.
In fact, in some ways there's literally an infinite number of questions that we can ask about our city.
The agencies can never keep up.
So the paradigm isn't exactly working, and I think our policymakers realize that, because in 2012, Mayor Bloomberg signed into law what he called the most ambitious and comprehensive open data legislation in the country.
In a lot of ways, he's right.
In the last two years, the city has released 1,000 datasets I would love to give you a little perspective and it's pretty awesome.
So you go and look at data like this, and instead of just counting the number of cabs, we can start to ask different questions.
So I had a question.
When's rush hour in New York City? It can be pretty bothersome. When is rush hour exactly? And I thought to myself, these cabs aren't just numbers, these are GPS recorders driving around in our city streets recording each and every ride they take.
There's data there, and I looked at that data, and I made a plot of the average speed of taxis in New York City throughout the day.
You can see that from about midnight to around 5:18 in the morning, speed increases, and at that point, things turn around, and they get slower and slower and slower until about 8:35 in the morning, when they end up at around 11 and a half miles per hour.
The average taxi is going 11 and a half miles per hour on our city streets, and it turns out it stays that way for the entire day.
or a voice or a piece of music, So I said to myself, I guess there's no rush hour in New York City.
There's just a rush day.
Makes sense. And this is important for a couple of reasons.
If you're a transportation planner, this might be pretty interesting to know.
But if you want to get somewhere quickly, you now know to set your alarm for 4:45 in the morning and you're all set.
New York, right? But there's a story behind this data.
This data wasn't just available, it turns out.
It actually came from something called a Freedom of Information Law Request, or a FOIL Request.
This is a form you can find on the Taxi and Limousine Commission website.
In order to access this data, you need to go get this form, fill it out, and they will notify you, and a guy named Chris Whong did exactly that.
Chris went down, and they told him, "Just bring a brand new hard drive down to our office, leave it here for five hours, we'll copy the data and you take it back." There's no time to settle down.
Now, Chris is the kind of guy who wants to make the data public, and so it ended up online for all to use, and that's where this graph came from.
And the fact that it exists is amazing. These GPS recorders -- really cool.
But the fact that we have citizens walking around with hard drives picking up data from city agencies to make it public -- it was already kind of public, you could get to it, but it was "public," it wasn't public.
And we can do better than that as a city.
We don't need our citizens walking around with hard drives.
Now, not every dataset is behind a FOIL Request.
Here is a map I made with the most dangerous intersections in New York City based on cyclist accidents.
So the red areas are more dangerous.
And what it shows is first the East side of Manhattan, especially in the lower area of Manhattan, has more cyclist accidents.
That might make sense because there are more cyclists coming off the bridges there.
But there's other hotspots worth studying.
There's Williamsburg. There's Roosevelt Avenue in Queens.
And this is exactly the kind of data we need for Vision Zero.
This is exactly what we're looking for.
But there's a story behind this data as well.
This data didn't just appear.
How many of you guys know this logo? Yeah, I see some shakes.
Have you ever tried to copy and paste data out of a PDF and make sense of it? I see more shakes.
More of you tried copying and pasting than knew the logo. I like that.
So what happened is, the data that you just saw was actually on a PDF.
In fact, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pages of PDF and in order to access it, you would either have to copy and paste for hundreds and hundreds of hours, or you could be John Krauss.
John Krauss was like, I'm not going to copy and paste this data. I'm going to write a program.
It's called the NYPD Crash Data Band-Aid, and it goes to the NYPD's website and it would download PDFs.
Every day it would search; if it found a PDF, it would download it and then it would run some PDF-scraping program, and out would come the text, and it would go on the Internet, and then people could make maps like that.
And the fact that the data's here, the fact that we have access to it -- This is one wing, and these are not specially selected small people.
You can imagine how many PDFs that is.
The fact that we have access to that is great, but let's not release it in PDF form, because then we're having our citizens write PDF scrapers.
It's not the best use of our citizens' time, and we as a city can do better than that.
Now, the good news is that the de Blasio administration actually recently released this data a few months ago, and so now we can actually have access to it, but there's a lot of data still entombed in PDF.
For example, our crime data is still only available in PDF.
And not just our crime data, our own city budget.
Our city budget is only readable right now in PDF form.
And it's not just us that can't analyze it -- And I knew exactly what that meant.
also only get it in PDF.
So our legislators cannot analyze the budget that they are voting for.
And I think as a city we can do a little better than that as well.
Now, there's a lot of data that's not hidden in PDFs.
This is an example of a map I made, and this is the dirtiest waterways in New York City.
Now, how do I measure dirty? Well, it's kind of a little weird, but I looked at the level of fecal coliform, which is a measurement of fecal matter in each of our waterways.
The larger the circle, the dirtier the water, so the large circles are dirty water, the small circles are cleaner.
What you see is inland waterways.
This is all data that was sampled by the city over the last five years.
And inland waterways are, in general, dirtier.
That makes sense, right? And the bigger circles are dirty. And I learned a few things from this.
Number one: Never swim in anything that ends in "creek" or "canal." But number two: I also found the dirtiest waterway in New York City, by this measure, one measure.
In Coney Island Creek, which is not the Coney Island you swim in, luckily.
It's on the other side.
But Coney Island Creek, 94 percent of samples taken over the last five years have had fecal levels so high that it would be against state law to swim in the water.
And this is not the kind of fact that you're going to see boasted in a city report, right? It's not going to be the front page on nyc.gov.
You're not going to see it there, but the fact that we can get to that data is awesome.
But once again, it wasn't super easy, because this data was not on the open data portal.
If you were to go to the open data portal, you'd see just a snippet of it, a year or a few months.
It was actually on the Department of Environmental Protection's website.
And each one of these links is an Excel sheet, and each Excel sheet is different.
Every heading is different: you copy, paste, reorganize.
When you do you can make maps and that's great, but once again, we can do better than that as a city, we can normalize things.
And we're getting there, because there's this website that Socrata makes called the Open Data Portal NYC.
This is where 1,100 data sets that don't suffer from the things I just told you live, and that number is growing, and that's great.
You can download data in any format, be it CSV or PDF or Excel document.
Whatever you want, you can download the data that way.
The problem is, once you do, you will find that each agency codes their addresses differently.
So one is street name, intersection street, street, borough, address, building, building address.
So once again, you're spending time, even when we have this portal, you're spending time normalizing our address fields.
And that's not the best use of our citizens' time.
We can do better than that as a city.
We can standardize our addresses, and if we do, we can get more maps like this.
This is a map of fire hydrants in New York City, but not just any fire hydrants.
These are the top 250 grossing fire hydrants in terms of parking tickets.
(Laughter) So I learned a few things from this map, and I really like this map.
Number one, just don't park on the Upper East Side.
Just don't. It doesn't matter where you park, you will get a hydrant ticket.
Number two, I found the two highest grossing hydrants in all of New York City, and they're on the Lower East Side, and they were bringing in over 55,000 dollars a year in parking tickets.
And that seemed a little strange to me when I noticed it, so I did a little digging and it turns out what you had is a hydrant Here it gets trickier.
which is like a seven-foot space to walk on, and then a parking spot.
And so these cars came along, and the hydrant -- and there was actually a parking spot painted there beautifully for them.
They would park there, and the NYPD disagreed with this designation and would ticket them.
And it wasn't just me who found a parking ticket.
This is the Google Street View car driving by finding the same parking ticket.
So I wrote about this on my blog, on I Quant NY, and the DOT responded, and they said, "While the DOT has not received any complaints about this location, we will review the roadway markings and make any appropriate alterations." And I thought to myself, typical government response, all right, moved on with my life.
But then, a few weeks later, something incredible happened.
They repainted the spot, and for a second I thought I saw the future of open data, because think about what happened here.
For five years, this spot was being ticketed, and it was confusing, and then a citizen found something, they told the city, and within a few weeks the problem was fixed.
It's amazing. And a lot of people see open data as being a watchdog.
that means, "seeker of truth." We can empower our citizens to be better partners for government, and it's not that hard.
All we need are a few changes.
If you're FOILing data, if you're seeing your data being FOILed over and over again, let's release it to the public, that's a sign that it should be made public.
And if you're a government agency releasing a PDF, let's pass legislation that requires you to post it with the underlying data, because that data is coming from somewhere.
I don't know where, but it's coming from somewhere, and you can release it with the PDF.
I always feel guilty when I say "I love you" to you.
Let's start with our addresses here in New York City.
Let's just start normalizing our addresses.
Because New York is a leader in open data.
Despite all this, we are absolutely a leader in open data, and if we start normalizing things, and set an open data standard, others will follow. The state will follow, and maybe the federal government, Other countries could follow, and its doctrine of mercy.
and map information from 100 countries.
It's not science fiction. We're actually quite close.
And by the way, who are we empowering with this? Because it's not just John Krauss and it's not just Chris Whong.
There are hundreds of meetups going on in New York City right now, active meetups.
There are thousands of people attending these meetups.
These people are going after work and on weekends, and they're attending these meetups to look at open data and make our city a better place.
Groups like BetaNYC, who just last week released something called citygram.nyc that allows you to subscribe to 311 complaints around your own home, or around your office.
You put in your address, you get local complaints.
And it's not just the tech community that are after these things.
It's urban planners like the students I teach at Pratt.
It's policy advocates, it's everyone, it's citizens from a diverse set of backgrounds.
And with some small, incremental changes, we can unlock the passion and the ability of our citizens to harness open data and make our city even better, whether it's one dataset, or one parking spot at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause) We are built out of very small stuff, I was reflecting on my life and trying to figure out where exactly was that moment when my journey began.
A long time passed by, and I simply couldn't figure out the beginning or the middle or the end of my story.
I always used to think that my beginning was one afternoon in my community when my mother had told me that I had escaped three arranged marriages by the time I was two.
Or one evening when electricity had failed for eight hours in our community, and my dad sat, surrounded by all of us, telling us stories of when he was a little kid struggling to go to school while his father, who was a farmer, wanted him to work in the fields with him.
Or that dark night when I was 16 when three little kids had come to me and they whispered in my ear that my friend was murdered in something called the honor killings.
But then I realized that, as much as I know that these moments have contributed on my journey, they have influenced my journey but they have not been the beginning of it, the world will shake." I like to call this blind championing of technology "trickle-down techonomics," where my father held the hand of my 14-year-old mother and they decided to walk out of the village to go to a town where they could send their kids to school.
In a way, I feel like my life is kind of a result of some wise choices and decisions they've made.
And just like that, another of their decisions was to keep me and my siblings connected to our roots.
While we were living in a community I fondly remember as called Ribabad, which means community of the poor, my dad made sure that we also had a house in our rural homeland.
I come from an indigenous tribe in the mountains of Balochistan called Brahui.
Brahui, or Brohi, means mountain dweller, and it is also my language.
Thanks to my father's very strict rules about connecting to our customs, I had to live a beautiful life of songs, cultures, traditions, stories, mountains, the consequence of which was that the receiving antennas But then, living in two extremes between the traditions of my culture, of my village, and then modern education in my school wasn't easy.
I was aware that I was the only girl who got to have such freedom, and I was guilty of it.
While going to school in Karachi and Hyderabad, a lot of my cousins and childhood friends were getting married off, some to older men, some in exchange, some even as second wives.
I got to see the beautiful tradition and its magic fade in front of me when I saw that the birth of a girl child was celebrated with sadness, when women were told to have patience as their main virtue.
Up until I was 16, I healed my sadness by crying, mostly at nights when everyone would sleep and I would sob in my pillow, until that one night when I found out my friend was killed in the name of honor.
Honor killings is a custom where men and women are suspected of having relationships before or outside of the marriage, and they're killed by their family for it.
Usually the killer is the brother or father or the uncle in the family.
The U.N. reports there are about 1,000 honor murders every year in Pakistan, and these are only the reported cases.
A custom that kills did not make any sense to me, and I knew I had to do something about it this time.
I was not going to cry myself to sleep.
I was going to do something, anything, to stop it.
I was 16 -- I started writing poetry and going door to door telling everybody about honor killings and why it happens, why it should be stopped, and raising awareness about it until I actually found a much, much better way to handle this issue.
In those days, we were living in a very small, one-roomed house in Karachi.
Every year, during the monsoon seasons, our house would flood up with water -- rainwater and sewage -- and my mom and dad would be taking the water out.
In those days, my dad brought home a huge machine, a computer.
It was so big it looked as if it was going to take up half of the only room we had, and had so many pieces and wires that needed to be connected.
But it was still the most exciting thing that has ever happened to me and my sisters.
My oldest brother Ali got to be in charge of taking care of the computer, and all of us were given 10 to 15 minutes every day to use it.
Being the oldest of eight kids, I got to use it the last, and that was after I had washed the dishes, cleaned the house, made dinner with my mom, and put blankets on the floor for everyone to sleep, and after that, I would run to the computer, connect it to the Internet, and have pure joy and wonder for 10 to 15 minutes.
In those days, I had discovered a website called Joogle.
[Google] (Laughter) In my frantic wish to do something about this custom, I made use of Google and discovered Facebook, a website where people can connect to anyone around the world, and so, from my very tiny, cement-roofed room in Karachi, I connected with people in the U.K., the U.S., Australia and Canada, and created a campaign called WAKE UP Campaign against Honor Killings.
It became enormous in just a few months.
I got a lot of support from all around the world.
Media was connecting to us.
A lot of people were reaching out trying to raise awareness with us.
It became so big that it went from online to the streets of my hometown, where we would do rallies and strikes trying to change the policies in Pakistan for women's support.
And while I thought everything was perfect, my team -- which was basically my friends and neighbors at that time -- thought everything was going so well, we had no idea a big opposition was coming to us.
My community stood up against us, saying we were spreading un-Islamic behavior.
We were challenging centuries-old customs in those communities.
I remember my father receiving anonymous letters saying, "Your daughter is spreading Western culture in the honorable societies." Our car was stoned at one point.
One day I went to the office and found our metal signboard wrinkled and broken as if a lot of people had been hitting it with something heavy.
Things got so bad that I had to hide myself in many ways.
I would put up the windows of the car, veil my face, not speak while I was in public, but eventually situations got worse when my life was threatened, and I had to leave, back to Karachi, and our actions stopped.
Back in Karachi, as an 18-year-old, I thought this was the biggest failure of my entire life.
I was devastated.
As a teenager, I was blaming myself for everything that happened.
And it turns out, when we started reflecting, we did realize that it was actually me and my team's fault.
There were two big reasons why our campaign had failed big time.
One of those, the first reason, is we were standing against core values of people.
We were saying no to something that was very important to them, challenging their code of honor, and hurting them deeply in the process.
And number two, which was very important for me to learn, and amazing, and surprising for me to learn, was that we were not including the true heroes who should be fighting for themselves.
The women in the villages had no idea we were fighting for them in the streets.
Every time I would go back, I would find my cousins and friends with scarves on their faces, and I would ask, "What happened?" And they'd be like, "Our husbands beat us." But we are working in the streets for you! We are changing the policies.
because once we understood those limits, So then we found out something which was very amazing for us.
The policies of a country do not necessarily always affect the tribal and rural communities.
It was devastating -- like, oh, we can't actually do something about this? And we found out there's a huge gap when it comes to official policies and the real truth on the ground.
So this time, we were like, we are going to do something different.
We are going to use strategy, and we are going to go back and apologize.
Yes, apologize.
We went back to the communities and we said we are very ashamed of what we did.
We are here to apologize, and in fact, we are here to make it up to you.
How do we do that? We are going to promote three of your main cultures.
We know that it's music, language, and embroidery.
Nobody believed us.
Nobody wanted to work with us.
It took a lot of convincing and discussions with these communities until they agreed that we are going to promote their language by making a booklet of their stories, fables and old tales in the tribe, and we would promote their music by making a CD of the songs from the tribe, and some drumbeating.
And the third, which was my favorite, was we would promote their embroidery by making a center in the village where women would come every day to make embroidery.
And so it began.
We worked with one village, and we started our first center.
It was a beautiful day.
We started the center.
Women were coming to make embroidery, and going through a life-changing process of education, learning about their rights, what Islam says about their rights, and enterprise development, how they can create money, and then how they can create money from money, how they can fight the customs that have been destroying their lives from so many centuries, in a way that I just couldn't quite understand, women are supposed to be shoulder to shoulder with men.
Women have so much status that we have not been hearing, that they have not been hearing, and we needed to tell them that they need to know where their rights are and how to take them by themselves, because they can do it and we can't.
So this was the model which actually came out -- very amazing.
Through embroidery we were promoting their traditions.
We went into the village. We would mobilize the community.
We would make a center inside where 30 women will come for six months to learn about value addition of traditional embroidery, enterprise development, life skills and basic education, and about their rights and how to say no to those customs and how to stand as leaders for themselves and the society.
After six months, we would connect these women to loans and to markets where they can become local entrepreneurs in their communities.
We soon called this project Sughar.
Sughar is a local word used in many, many languages in Pakistan.
It means skilled and confident women.
I truly believe, to create women leaders, there's only one thing you have to do: Just let them know that they have what it takes to be a leader.
These women you see here, they have strong skills and potential to be leaders.
All we had to do was remove the barriers that surrounded them, and that's what we decided to do.
But then while we were thinking everything was going well, once again everything was fantastic, we found our next setback: A lot of men started seeing the visible changes in their wife.
She's speaking more, she's making decisions -- oh my gosh, she's handling everything in the house.
They stopped them from coming to the centers, and this time, we were like, okay, time for strategy two.
We went to the fashion industry in Pakistan and decided to do research about what happens there.
Turns out the fashion industry in Pakistan is very strong and growing day by day, but there is less contribution from the tribal areas and to the tribal areas, especially women.
So we decided to launch our first ever tribal women's very own fashion brand, which is now called Nomads.
And so women started earning more, they started contributing more financially to the house, and men had to think again before saying no to them when they were coming to the centers.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
In 2013, we launched our first Sughar Hub instead of a center.
We partnered with TripAdvisor and created a cement hall in the middle of a village and invited so many other organizations to work over there.
We created this platform for the nonprofits so they can touch and work on the other issues that Sughar is not working on, which would be an easy place for them to give trainings, use it as a farmer school, even as a marketplace, and anything they want to use it for, and they have been doing really amazingly.
And so far, we have been able to support 900 women in 24 villages around Pakistan.
(Applause) But that's actually not what I want.
My dream is to reach out to one million women in the next 10 years, and to make sure that happens, this year we launched Sughar Foundation in the U.S.
It is not just going to fund Sughar but many other organizations in Pakistan to replicate the idea and to find even more innovative ways to unleash the rural women's potential in Pakistan.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Khalida, you are quite the force of nature.
I mean, this story, in many ways, just seems beyond belief.
It's incredible that someone so young could do achieve this much through so much force and ingenuity.
So I guess one question: This is a spectacular dream to reach out and empower a million women -- how much of the current success depends on you, the force of this magnetic personality? How does it scale? Khalida Brohi: I think my job is to give the inspiration out, give my dream out.
I can't teach how to do it, because there are so many different ways.
We have been experimenting with three ways only.
There are a hundred different ways to unleash potential in women.
I would just give the inspiration and that's my job.
I will keep doing it. Sughar will still be growing.
We are planning to reach out to two more villages, and soon I believe we will be scaling out of Pakistan into South Asia and beyond.
CA: I love that when you talked about your team in the talk, I mean, you were all 18 at the time.
What did this team look like? This was school friends, right? KB: Do people here believe that I'm at an age where I'm supposed to be a grandmother in my village? My mom was married at nine, and I am the oldest woman not married and not doing anything in my life in my village.
CA: Wait, wait, wait, not doing anything? KB: No. CA: You're right.
KB: People feel sorry for me, a lot of times.
CA: But how much time are you spending now actually back in Balochistan? KB: I live over there.
We live between, still, Karachi and Balochistan.
My siblings are all going to school.
I am still the oldest of eight siblings.
CA: But what you're doing is definitely threatening to some people there.
How do you handle safety? Do you feel safe? Are there issues there? KB: This question has come to me a lot of times before, and I feel like the word "fear" just comes to me and then drops, but there is one fear that I have that is different from that.
The fear is that if I get killed, what would happen to the people who love me so much? My mom waits for me till late at night that I should come home.
My sisters want to learn so much from me, and there are many, many girls in my community who want to talk to me and ask me different things, and I recently got engaged. (Laughs) (Applause) CA: Is he here? You've got to stand up.
(Applause) KB: Escaping arranged marriages, I chose my own husband across the world in L.A., a really different world.
I had to fight for a whole year. That's totally a different story.
But I think that's the only thing that I'm afraid of, and I don't want my mom to not see anyone when she waits in the night.
CA: So people who want to help you on their way, they can go on, they can maybe buy some of these clothes that you're bringing over that are actually made, the embroidery is done back in Balochistan? KB: Yeah.
CA: Or they can get involved in the foundation.
KB: Definitely. We are looking for as many people as we can, because now that the foundation's in the beginning process, I am trying to learn a lot about how to operate, how to get funding or reach out to more organizations, and especially in the e-commerce, which is very new for me.
I mean, I am not a fashion person, believe me.
CA: Well, it's been incredible to have you here.
Please go on being courageous, go on being smart, and please stay safe.
KB: Thank you so much. CA: Thank you, Khalida. (Applause) We humans have always been very concerned about the health of our bodies, but we haven't always been that good at figuring out what's important.
Take the ancient Egyptians, for example: very concerned about the body parts they thought they'd need in the afterlife, but they left some parts out.
This part, for example.
Although they very carefully preserved the stomach, the lungs, the liver, and so forth, they just mushed up the brain, drained it out through the nose, and threw it away, which makes sense, really, because what does a brain do for us anyway? But imagine if there were a kind of neglected organ in our bodies that weighed just as much as the brain and in some ways was just as important to who we are, but we knew so little about and treated with such disregard.
And imagine if, through new scientific advances, we were just beginning to understand its importance to how we think of ourselves.
Wouldn't you want to know more about it? Well, it turns out that we do have something just like that: our gut, or rather, its microbes.
But it's not just the microbes in our gut that are important.
Microbes all over our body in the history of the U.S., the history of the world that make different people who we are.
So for example, have you ever noticed how some people get bitten by mosquitos way more often than others? It turns out that everyone's anecdotal experience out camping is actually true.
For example, I seldom get bitten by mosquitos, but my partner Amanda attracts them in droves, and the reason why is that we have different microbes on our skin that produce different chemicals that the mosquitos detect.
Now, microbes are also really important in the field of medicine.
So, for example, what microbes you have in your gut determine whether particular painkillers are toxic to your liver.
They also determine whether or not other drugs will work for your heart condition.
And, if you're a fruit fly, at least, your microbes determine who you want to have sex with.
We haven't demonstrated this in humans yet but maybe it's just a matter of time before we find out. (Laughter) So microbes are performing a huge range of functions.
They help us digest our food.
They help educate our immune system.
They help us resist disease, and they may even be affecting our behavior.
So what would a map of all these microbial communities look like? Well, it wouldn't look exactly like this, but it's a helpful guide for understanding biodiversity.
Different parts of the world have different landscapes of organisms that are immediately characteristic of one place or another or another.
With microbiology, it's kind of the same, although I've got to be honest with you: All the microbes essentially look the same under a microscope.
So instead of trying to identify them visually, what we do is we look at their DNA sequences, and in a project called the Human Microbiome Project, NIH funded this $173 million project where hundreds of researchers came together And apparently, that was because men played it differently, and all of these microbes in the human body.
So when we take them together, they look like this.
It's a bit more difficult to tell who lives where now, isn't it? What my lab does is develop computational techniques that allow us to take all these terabytes of sequence data and turn them into something that's a bit more useful as a map, and so when we do that with the human microbiome data from 250 healthy volunteers, it looks like this.
Each point here represents all the complex microbes in an entire microbial community.
See, I told you they basically all look the same.
So what we're looking at is each point represents one microbial community from one body site of one healthy volunteer.
And so you can see that there's different parts of the map in different colors, almost like separate continents.
And what it turns out to be is that those, as the different regions of the body, have very different microbes in them.
So what we have is we have the oral community up there in green.
Over on the other side, we have the skin community in blue, the vaginal community in purple, and then right down at the bottom, we have the fecal community in brown.
And we've just over the last few years found out that the microbes in different parts of the body are amazingly different from one another.
So if I look at just one person's microbes in the mouth and in the gut, it turns out that the difference between those two microbial communities is enormous.
It's bigger than the difference between the microbes in this reef and the microbes in this prairie.
So this is incredible when you think about it.
What it means is that a few feet of difference in the human body makes more of a difference to your microbial ecology than hundreds of miles on Earth.
And this is not to say that two people look basically the same in the same body habitat, either.
So you probably heard that we're pretty much all the same in terms of our human DNA.
You're 99.99 percent identical in terms of your human DNA to the person sitting next to you.
But that's not true of your gut microbes: you might only share 10 percent similarity with the person sitting next to you in terms of your gut microbes.
So that's as different as the bacteria on this prairie and the bacteria in this forest.
and regular investment and growing regular investment.
have all these different kinds of functions that I told you about, everything from digesting food to involvement in different kinds of diseases, metabolizing drugs, and so forth.
So how do they do all this stuff? Well, in part it's because although there's just three pounds of those microbes in our gut, they really outnumber us.
And so how much do they outnumber us? Well, it depends on what you think of as our bodies.
Is it our cells? Well, each of us consists of about 10 trillion human cells, but we harbor as many as 100 trillion microbial cells.
So they outnumber us 10 to one.
Now, you might think, well, we're human because of our DNA, but it turns out that each of us has about 20,000 human genes, depending on what you count exactly, but as many as two million to 20 million microbial genes.
So whichever way we look at it, we're vastly outnumbered by our microbial symbionts.
And it turns out that in addition to traces of our human DNA, we also leave traces of our microbial DNA for the kids that like to draw and have that talent, We showed in a study a few years ago that you can actually match the palm of someone's hand up to the computer mouse that they use routinely with up to 95 percent accuracy.
So this came out in a scientific journal a few years ago, so you really know it's true.
(Laughter) So where do our microbes come from in the first place? Well if, as I do, you have dogs or kids, you probably have some dark suspicions about that, all of which are true, by the way.
So just like we can match you to your computer equipment by the microbes you share, we can also match you up to your dog.
But it turns out that in adults, microbial communities are relatively stable, so even if you live together with someone, you'll maintain your separate microbial identity over a period of weeks, months, even years.
It turns out that our first microbial communities depend a lot on how we're born.
So babies that come out the regular way, all of their microbes are basically like the vaginal community, whereas babies that are delivered by C-section, all of their microbes instead look like skin.
And this might be associated with some of the differences in health associated with Cesarean birth, such as more asthma, more allergies, even more obesity, all of which have been linked to microbes now, and when you think about it, until recently, every surviving mammal had been delivered by the birth canal, and so the lack of those protective microbes that we've co-evolved with might be really important for a lot of these different conditions that we now know involve the microbiome.
When my own daughter was born a couple of years ago by emergency C-section, we took matters into our own hands and made sure she was coated with those vaginal microbes that she would have gotten naturally.
Now, it's really difficult to tell whether this has had an effect on her health specifically, right? With a sample size of just one child, no matter how much we love her, you don't really have enough of a sample size to figure out what happens on average, but at two years old, she hasn't had an ear infection yet, so we're keeping our fingers crossed on that one.
And what's more, we're starting to do clinical trials with more children to figure out whether this has a protective effect generally.
So how we're born has a tremendous effect on what microbes we have initially, but where do we go after that? What I'm showing you again here is this map of the Human Microbiome Project Data, so each point represents a sample from one body site from one of 250 healthy adults.
And you've seen children develop physically.
You've seen them develop mentally.
Now, for the first time, you're going to see You don't have to burn any incense, So what we are going to look at the fecal community, which represents the gut, sampled every week for almost two and a half years.
And so we're starting on day one.
What's going to happen is that the infant is going to start off as this yellow dot, and you can see that he's starting off basically in the vaginal community, as we would expect from his delivery mode.
And what's going to happen over these two and a half years is that he's going to travel all the way down to resemble the adult fecal community from healthy volunteers down at the bottom.
So I'm just going to start this going and we'll see how that happens.
What you can see, and remember each step in this is just one week, what you can see is that week to week, the differences week to week are much greater than the differences between individual healthy adults in the Human Microbiome Project cohort, which are those brown dots down at the bottom.
And you can see he's starting to approach the adult fecal community.
This is up to about two years.
But something amazing is about to happen here.
So he's getting antibiotics for an ear infection.
What you can see is this huge change in the community, followed by a relatively rapid recovery.
I'll just rewind that for you.
And what we can see is that just over these few weeks, we have a much more radical change, have studied chimpanzees intensively for decades.
followed by a relatively rapid recovery, and by the time he reaches day 838, which is the end of this video, you can see that he has essentially reached the healthy adult stool community, despite that antibiotic intervention.
So this is really interesting because it raises fundamental questions about what happens when we intervene at different ages in a child's life.
So does what we do early on, where the microbiome is changing so rapidly, actually matter, or is it like throwing a stone into a stormy sea, where the ripples will just be lost? Well, fascinatingly, it turns out that if you give children antibiotics in the first six months of life, they're more likely to become obese later on than if they don't get antibiotics then or only get them later, and so what we do early on may have profound impacts on the gut microbial community and on later health that we're only beginning to understand.
So this is fascinating, because one day, in addition to the effects that antibiotics have on antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which are very important, they may also be degrading our gut microbial ecosystems, and so one day we may come to regard antibiotics with the same horror that we currently reserve for those metal tools that the Egyptians used to use to mush up the brains So I mentioned that microbes have all these important functions, and they've also now, just over the past few years, been connected to a whole range of different diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, heart disease, colon cancer, and even obesity.
Obesity has a really large effect, as it turns out, and today, we can tell whether you're lean or obese with 90 percent accuracy by looking at the microbes in your gut.
Now, although that might sound impressive, to meet Oshea and find out who this person was because you can probably tell which of these people is obese without knowing anything about their gut microbes, but it turns out that even if we sequence their complete genomes and had all their human DNA, we could only predict which one was obese with about 60 percent accuracy.
So that's amazing, right? What it means that the three pounds of microbes that you carry around with you may be more important for some health conditions than every single gene in your genome.
And then in mice, we can do a lot more.
So in mice, microbes have been linked to all kinds of additional conditions, including things like multiple sclerosis, depression, autism, and again, obesity.
We found him in a small room that was filled with cages that correlate with disease are cause or effect? Well, one thing we can do is we can raise some mice without any microbes of their own in a germ-free bubble.
Then we can add in some microbes that we think are important, and see what happens.
When we take the microbes from an obese mouse and transplant them into a genetically normal mouse that's been raised in a bubble with no microbes of its own, it becomes fatter than if it got them from a regular mouse.
Why this happens is absolutely amazing, though.
Sometimes what's going on is that the microbes are helping them digest food more efficiently from the same diet, so they're taking more energy from their food, but other times, the microbes are actually affecting their behavior.
What they're doing is they're eating more than the normal mouse, so they only get fat if we let them eat as much as they want.
So this is really remarkable, right? The implication is that microbes can affect mammalian behavior.
So you might be wondering whether we can also do this sort of thing across species, and it turns out that if you take microbes from an obese person and transplant them into mice you've raised germ-free, those mice will also become fatter than if they received the microbes from a lean person, but we can design a microbial community that we inoculate them with that prevents them from gaining this weight.
We can also do this for malnutrition.
So in a project funded by the Gates Foundation, what we're looking at is children in Malawi who have kwashiorkor, a profound form of malnutrition, and mice that get the kwashiorkor community transplanted into them lose 30 percent of their body mass in just three weeks, but we can restore their health by using the same peanut butter-based supplement that is used for the children in the clinic, and the mice that receive the community from the healthy identical twins of the kwashiorkor children do fine.
This is truly amazing because it suggests that we can pilot therapies by trying them out in a whole bunch of different mice with individual people's gut communities and perhaps tailor those therapies all the way down to the individual level.
So I think it's really important that everyone has a chance to participate in this discovery.
we started this project called American Gut, which allows you to claim a place for yourself on this microbial map.
This is now the largest crowd-funded science project that we know of -- over 8,000 people have signed up at this point.
What happens is, they send in their samples, we sequence the DNA of their microbes and then release the results back to them.
We also release them, de-identified, to scientists, to educators, to interested members of the general public, and so forth, On Earth, there are many intelligent species, On the other hand, when we do tours of our lab at the BioFrontiers Institute, and we explain that we use robots and lasers to look at poop, it turns out that not everyone wants to know.
(Laughter) But I'm guessing that many of you do, and so I brought some kits here if you're interested in trying this out for yourself.
So why might we want to do this? Well, it turns out that microbes are not just important for finding out where we are in terms of our health, but they can actually cure disease.
This is one of the newest things we've been able to visualize with colleagues at the University of Minnesota.
So here's that map of the human microbiome again.
What we're looking at now -- I'm going to add in the community of some people with C. diff.
So, this is a terrible form of diarrhea where you have to go up to 20 times a day, and these people have failed antibiotic therapy for two years So what would happen if we transplanted some of the stool from a healthy donor, that star down at the bottom, into these patients.
Would the good microbes do battle with the bad microbes and help to restore their health? So let's watch exactly what happens there.
Four of those patients are about to get a transplant from that healthy donor at the bottom, and what you can see is that immediately, you have this radical change in the gut community.
So one day after you do that transplant, all those symptoms clear up, the diarrhea vanishes, and they're essentially healthy again, coming to resemble the donor's community, and they stay there.
(Applause) So we're just at the beginning of this discovery.
We're just finding out that microbes have implications for all these different kinds of diseases, ranging from inflammatory bowel disease to obesity, and perhaps even autism and depression.
What we need to do, though, is we need to develop a kind of microbial GPS, where we don't just know where we are currently but also where we want to go and what we need to do in order to get there, and we need to be able to make this simple enough that even a child can use it. (Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause) We need to change the culture in our jails and prisons, and was assigned to Mountain Home Air Force Base and was a part of the air police squadron.
Upon first arriving there, the first goal that I had so I could bring my wife and my new baby, Melanie, out to join me in Idaho.
I immediately went to the personnel office, and talking with the guys in personnel, they said, "Hey, no problem finding an apartment in Mountain Home, Idaho.
The people down there love us because they know if they have an airman who is coming in to rent one of their apartments, they'll always get their money." And that was a really important thing.
He said, "So here is a list of people that you can call, and then they will then allow you to select the apartment that you want." So I got the list; I made the call.
The lady answered on the other end and I told her what I wanted.
She said, "Oh, great you called.
We have four or five apartments available right now." She said, "Do you want a one-bedroom or two-bedroom?" Then she said, "Let's not talk about that.
Just come on down, select the apartment that you want.
We'll sign the contract and you'll have keys in your hand to get your family out here right away." So I was excited.
I jumped in my car. I went downtown and knocked on the door.
When I knocked on the door, the woman came to the door, and she looked at me, and she said, "Can I help you?" I said, "Yes, I'm the person who called about the apartments.
I was just coming down to make my selection." She said, "You know what? I'm really sorry, but my husband rented those apartments and didn't tell me about them." I said, "You mean he rented all five of them in one hour?" She didn't give me a response, and what she said was this: She said, "Why don't you leave your number, and if we have some openings, I'll give you a call?" Needless to say, I did not get a call from her.
Nor did I get any responses from the other people that they gave me on the list where I could get apartments.
So as a result of that, and feeling rejected, I went back to the base, and I talked to the squadron commander.
His name was McDow, Major McDow.
I said, "Major McDow, I need your help." I told him what happened, and here's what he said to me: He said, "James, I would love to help you.
But you know the problem: We can't make people rent to folks that they don't want to rent to.
And besides, we have a great relationship with people in the community and we really don't want to damage that." He said, "So maybe this is what you should do.
Why don't you let your family stay home, because you do know that you get a 30-day leave.
So once a year, you can go home to your family, spend 30 days and then come on back." Needless to say, that didn't resonate for me.
So after leaving him, I went back to personnel, and talking to the clerk, he said, "Jim, I think I have a solution for you.
There's an airman who is leaving and he has a trailer.
If you noticed, in Mountain Home, there are trailer parks and trailers all over the place.
You can buy his trailer, and you'd probably get a really good deal because he wants to get out of town as soon as possible.
And that would take care of your problem, and that would provide the solution for you." So I immediately jumped in my car, went downtown, saw the trailer -- because the clickity-clack of the heels but under the circumstances, I figured that was the best thing that I could do.
So I bought the trailer.
And then I asked him, "Can I just leave the trailer here, and that would take care of all my problems, I wouldn't have to find another trailer park?" He said, "Before I say yes to that, I need to check with management." So I get back to the base, he called me back and management said, "No, you can't leave the trailer here because we had promised that slot to some other people." And that was strange to me because there were several other slots that were open, but it just so happened that he had promised that slot to someone else.
So, what I did -- and he said, "You shouldn't worry, Jim, because there are a lot of trailer parks." So I put out another exhaustive list of going to trailer parks.
I went to one after another, after another.
And I got the same kind of rejection there that I received when I was looking for the apartment.
And as a result, the kind of comments that they made to me, in addition to saying that they didn't have any slots open, one person said, "Jim, the reason why we can't rent to you, we already have a Negro family in the trailer park." He said, "And it's not me, because I like you people." (Laughs) And that's what I did, too. I chuckled, too.
He said, "But here's the problem: now I belong to a community of many people who stand up with me.
and I can't afford to take that kind of a hit." He said, "I just can't rent to you." Even though that was discouraging, it didn't stop me.
I kept looking, and I looked at the far end of the town in Mountain Home, and there was a small trailer park.
I mean, a really small trailer park.
It didn't have any paved roads in it, it didn't have the concrete slabs, it didn't have fencing to portion off your trailer slot from other trailer slots.
It didn't have a laundry facility.
But the conclusion I reached at that moment was that I didn't have a lot of other options.
So I called my wife, and I said, "We're going to make this one work." And we moved into it and we became homeowners in Mountain Home, Idaho.
And of course, eventually things settled down.
Four years after that, I received papers to move from Mountain Home, Idaho to a place called Goose Bay, Labrador.
We won't even talk about that. It was another great location. (Laughter) So my challenge then was to get my family from Mountain Home, Idaho to Sharon, Pennsylvania.
That wasn't a problem because we had just purchased a brand-new automobile.
My mother called and said she'll fly out.
She'll be with us as we drive, she'll help us manage the children.
So she came out, her and Alice put a lot of food together for the trip.
That morning, we left at about 5 a.m.
Great trip, having a great time, good conversation.
Somewhere around 6:30, 7 o'clock, we got a little bit tired, and we said, "Why don't we get a motel so that we can rest and then have an early start in the morning?" So we were looking at a number of the motels as we drove down the road, and we saw one, it was a great big, bright flashing light that said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacanies." So we stopped in.
They were in the parking lot, I went inside.
When I walked inside, the lady was just finishing up one contract with some folks, some other people were coming in behind me.
And so I walked to the counter, and she said, "How can I help you?" I said, "I would like to get a motel for the evening for my family." She said, "You know, I'm really sorry, I just rented the last one.
We will not have any more until the morning." She said, "But if you go down the road about an hour, 45 minutes, there's another trailer park down there." I said, "Yeah, but you still have the 'Vacancies' light on, and it's flashing." She said, "Oh, I forgot." And she reached over and turned the light off.
She looked at me and I looked at her.
There were other people in the room.
She kind of looked at them. No one said anything.
So I just got the hint and I left, and went outside to the parking lot.
And I told my mother and I told my wife and also Melanie, and I said, "It looks like we're going to have to drive a little bit further down the road to be able to sleep tonight." And we did drive down the road, but just before we took off and pulled out of the parking lot, guess what happened? The light came back on.
And it said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacancies." We were able to find a nice place.
It wasn't our preference, but it was secure and it was clean.
And so we had a great sleep that night.
The piece that's important about that is that we had similar kinds of experiences from Idaho all the way through to Pennsylvania, where we were rejected from hotels, motels and restaurants.
But we made it to Pennsylvania.
We got the family settled. Everyone was glad to see the kids.
I jumped on a plane and shot off to Goose Bay, Labrador, which is another story, right? (Laughter) Here it is, 53 years later, I now have nine grandchildren, two great-grandchildren.
Five of the grandchildren are boys.
I have master's, Ph.D., undergrad, one in medical school.
I have a couple that are trending.
They're almost there but not quite. (Laughter) I have one who has been in college now for eight years.
And all those mega-barrels under Detroit He doesn't have a degree yet, but he wants to be a comedian.
So we're just trying to get him to stay in school.
Because you never know, just because you're funny at home, does not make you a comedian, right? (Laughter) But the thing about it, they're all good kids -- no drugs, no babies in high school, no crime.
So with that being the backdrop, I was sitting in my TV room watching TV, and they were talking about Ferguson and all the hullabaloo that was going on.
And all of a sudden, one of the news commentators got on the air and she said, "In the last three months, eight unarmed African-American males have been killed by police, white homeowners, or white citizens." For some reason, at that moment it just all hit me.
I said, "What is it? It is so insane.
What is the hatred that's causing people to do these kinds of things?" Just then, one of my grandsons called.
He said, "Granddad, did you hear what they said on TV?" I said, "Yes, I did." He said, "I'm just so confused.
We do everything we do, but it seems that driving while black, walking while black, talking while black, it's just dangerous.
What can we do? We do everything that you told us to do.
When stopped by the police, we place both hands on the steering wheel at the 12 o'clock position.
If asked to get identification, we tell them, 'I am slowly reaching over into the glove compartment to get my I.D.' When pulled out of the car to be searched, when laid on the ground to be searched, when our trunks are opened to be searched, And then suing the state of Texas and its governor Rick Perry 'Don't you challenge the police.
After it's over, call us and we'll be the ones to challenge." He said, "And this is the piece that really bugs me: Our white friends, our buddies, we kind of hang together.
When they hear about these kinds of things happening to us, they say, 'Why do you take it? You need to push back. You need to challenge.
You need to ask them for their identification.'" And here's what the boys have been taught to tell them: "We know that you can do that, but please do not do that while we're in the car because the consequences for you are significantly different than the consequences for us." And so as a grandparent, what do I tell my grandsons? How do I keep them safe? How do I keep them alive? As a result of this, people have come to me and said, "Jim, are you angry?" And my response to that is this: "I don't have the luxury of being angry, and I also know the consequences of being enraged." So therefore, the only thing that I can do is take my collective intellect and my energy and my ideas and my experiences and dedicate myself to challenge, at any point in time, anything that looks like it might be racist.
So the first thing I have to do is to educate, the second thing I have to do is to unveil racism, and the last thing I need to do is do everything within my power to eradicate racism in my lifetime by any means necessary.
The second thing I do is this: I want to appeal to Americans.
I want to appeal to their humanity, to their dignity, to their civic pride and ownership to be able to not react to these heinous crimes in an adverse manner.
But instead, to elevate your level of societal knowledge, your level of societal awareness and societal consciousness to then collectively come together, all of us come together, to make sure that we speak out against and we challenge any kind of insanity, any kind of insanity that makes it okay to kill unarmed people, regardless of their ethnicity, regardless of their race, regardless of their diversity makeup.
We have to challenge that. It doesn't make any sense.
The only way I think we can do that is through a collective.
We need to have black and white and Asian and Hispanic just to step forward and say, "We are not going to accept that kind of behavior anymore." I am multidisciplinary.
As a scientist, I've been a crew commander for a NASA Mars simulation last year, and as an artist, I create multicultural community art all over the planet.
And recently, I've actually been combining both.
But let me first talk a little more about that NASA mission.
This is the HI-SEAS program.
HI-SEAS is a NASA-funded planetary surface analogue on the Mauna Loa volcano in Hawaii, and it's a research program that is specifically designed I lived in this dome for four months with a crew of six, a very interesting experience, of course.
We did all kinds of research.
Our main research was actually a food study, but apart from that food study -- developing a new food system for astronauts living in deep space -- we also did all kinds of other research.
We did extra-vehicular activities, as you can see here, wearing mock-up space suits, but we also had our chores and lots of other stuff to do, like questionnaires at the end of every day.
Busy, busy work.
Now, as you can imagine, it's quite challenging to live with just a small group of people in a small space for a long time.
There's all kinds of psychological challenges: how to keep a team together in these circumstances; how to deal with the warping of time you start to sense when you're living in these circumstances; sleep problems that arise; etc.
But also we learned a lot.
I learned a lot about how individual crew members actually cope with a situation like this; how you can keep a crew productive and happy, for example, giving them a good deal of autonomy is a good trick to do that; and honestly, I learned a lot about leadership, because I was a crew commander.
So doing this mission, I really started thinking more deeply about our future in outer space.
We will venture into outer space, and we will start inhabiting outer space.
I have no doubt about it.
It might take 50 years or it might take 500 years, but it's going to happen nevertheless.
So I came up with a new art project called Seeker.
And the Seeker project is actually challenging communities all over the world to come up with starship prototypes that re-envision human habitation and survival.
That's the core of the project.
Now, one important thing: This is not a dystopian project.
This is not about, "Oh my God, the world is going wrong and we have to escape because we need another future somewhere else." No, no.
The project is basically inviting people to take a step away from earthbound constraints and, as such, reimagine our future.
share 12 or 13.
so that's really the important part of what we're doing.
Now, in this project, I'm using a cocreation approach, which is a slightly different approach from what you would expect from many artists.
I'm essentially dropping a basic idea into a group, into a community, people start gravitating to the idea, and together, we shape and build the artwork.
It's a little bit like termites, really.
We just work together, and even, for example, when architects visit what we're doing, sometimes they have a bit of a hard time understanding how we build without a master plan.
We always come up with these fantastic large-scale scupltures that actually we can also inhabit.
The first version was done in Belgium and Holland.
It was built with a team of almost 50 people.
This is the second iteration of that same project, but in Slovenia, in a different country, and the new group was like, we're going to do the architecture differently.
So they took away the architecture, they kept the base of the artwork, and they built an entirely new, much more biomorphic architecture on top of that.
And that's another crucial part of the project.
It's an evolving artwork, evolving architecture.
This was the last version that was just presented a few weeks ago in Holland, which was using caravans as modules to build a starship.
We bought some second-hand caravans, cut them open, and reassembled them into a starship.
Now, when we're thinking about starships, we're not just approaching it as a technological challenge.
ecology, people and technology.
So there's always a strong ecological component in the project.
Here you can see aquaponic systems that are actually surrounding the astronauts, so they're constantly in contact with part of the food that they're eating.
Now, a very typical thing for this project is that we run our own isolation missions inside these art and design projects.
We actually lock ourselves up for multiple days on end, and test what we build.
And this is, for example, on the right hand side you can see an isolation mission in the Museum of Modern Art in Ljubljana in Slovenia, where six artists and designers locked themselves up -- I was part of that -- for four days inside the museum.
And, of course, obviously, this is a very performative and very strong experience for all of us.
Now, the next version of the project is currently being developed together with Camilo Rodriguez-Beltran, who is also a TED Fellow, in the Atacama Desert in Chile, a magical place.
First of all, it's really considered a Mars analogue.
It really does look like Mars in certain locations and has been used by NASA to test equipment.
And it has a long history of being connected to space through observations of the stars.
It's now home to ALMA, the large telescope that's being developed there.
But also, it's the driest location on the planet, and that makes it extremely interesting to build our project, because suddenly, sustainability is something we have to explore fully.
We have no other option, so I'm very curious to see what's going to happen.
Now, a specific thing for this particular version of the project is that I'm very interested to see how we can connect with the local population, the native population.
These people have been living there for a very l